Project Gutenberg's The Story of the Bank of England, by Henry Warren

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Story of the Bank of England
       A History of English Banking, and a Sketch of the Money Market

Author: Henry Warren

Release Date: October 13, 2020 [EBook #63449]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE BANK OF ENGLAND ***




Produced by Graeme Mackreth and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)








[Illustration: THE BANK OF ENGLAND.]




  THE STORY

  OF THE

  Bank of England

  (A History of English Banking, and
  a Sketch of the Money Market)

  BY

  HENRY WARREN

  AUTHOR OF

  "YOUR BANKERS' POSITION AT A GLANCE"

  ETC.


  JORDAN & SONS, LIMITED
  116 AND 120 CHANCERY LANE, LONDON, W.C.

  1903




  LONDON:
  PRINTED BY JORDAN AND SONS, LIMITED,
  120 CHANCERY LANE, W.C.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER      PAGE

  I. The Period of Monopoly, 1708 to 1826                 1

  II. Before and After the Act of 1844                   24

  III. The Bank's Weekly Return                          48

  IV. The Issue and Banking Departments                  63

  V. The Store in the Issue Department                   74

  VI. Weekly Differences in the Return                   85

  VII. The Bank as Agent of the Mint                     94

  VIII. The Principal Currency Drains                   101

  IX. Banks and the Creation of Credit                  113

  X. The Battle of the Banks                            126

  XI. The London Money Market                           139

  XII. The Bank Rate and Stock Exchange Securities      154

  XIII. The Banks as Stockbrokers                       161

  XIV. The Short Loan Fund and the Price of Securities  169

  XV. Panic Years                                       177

  XVI. The Banks and the Public                         224

  XVII. Bank Stock                                      240




CHAPTER I.

The Period of Monopoly, 1708 to 1826.


The Bank of England, which is managed by a Governor, Sub-Governor, and
twenty-four Directors, was incorporated in 1694 at the suggestion of a
Scotsman, William Paterson, a man of roving disposition, whose Darien
expedition proved a miserable fiasco, cost Scotland some £400,000, and
shattered the health of Paterson, who died in London at the beginning
of 1719, if not in poverty at least stripped of nearly all his fortune.

Schemes relating to the Isthmus of Darien (or Panama), that narrow
little strip of land which unites the two Americas, have proved
fruitful in disaster. France's great canal venture, we all remember,
resulted in huge loss and grave scandal; and Paterson lived to bitterly
regret his colonisation scheme, devoutly wishing that he had pinned
his faith to his finance company, the Bank of England, for a finance
company it then was in every sense of the word.

Little is known of William Paterson's early career, the various
accounts relating thereto being meagre and conflicting, his enemies
describing him as a mere adventurer, and his friends declaring that
he was actuated by the worthiest of motives. However, when it is
remembered that his second great venture (the Darien scheme) involved
thousands in ruin, it is evident that had the man been a saint he would
not have lacked detractors, and though his public utterances sound
quaintly pious to the modern ear, it seems probable that he was only an
enterprising merchant, whose morality was neither better nor worse than
that of the times in which he lived.

The son of a Scotch farmer, Paterson left home at an early age, and,
after settling for a short time in the West of England, set sail for
the West Indies, returning to Europe about 1686 with the Darien scheme
in his brain. Receiving but scant encouragement in England, despite the
fact that his bank had been successfully floated, he concentrated his
energies upon Scotland, where his scheme fired the public imagination,
almost every Scotsman with a few pounds to invest eagerly taking the
money to the company, convinced that Panama was the natural commercial
centre of the world, and that gold would be rained therefrom upon
fortunate Scotland. The whole nation went almost frantic with the
fever, for Panama, with its gold mines and its world-wide trade,
was going to make Scotland rich beyond the dreams of avarice. It is
estimated that nearly half the capital of the country was sunk in the
Darien scheme.

Chartered by the Scottish Parliament in 1695, three vessels sailed
from Leith in July, 1698, with some twelve hundred settlers on board,
Paterson and his wife among the number. All Edinburgh flocked down to
Leith to wish the members God-speed, and then returned to their homes
to dream of the streams of gold with which Scotland was to be flooded.
In a few years everybody would be rich, and Edinburgh would be the
greatest and proudest city in the world. Trade, however, was destined
to flow to a city a little farther south.

The scheme proved a dismal failure. England and Holland opposed the
new colony; the East India Company treated it as a rival, and Spain
was actively hostile. The climate did the rest. Before the close of
1699 "New Edinburgh" was deserted, and the colonists, decimated by
want of provisions and disease, set sail for New York. To make matters
worse, a second company meanwhile had sailed from Scotland, where the
utmost enthusiasm still prevailed; but the new arrivals found the town
deserted, and themselves at the mercy of the Spanish warships. Mad with
rage at the lack of success of their national adventure, the Scotch
openly accused the English Government of treachery, declaring that its
conduct in withholding food supplies was as discreditable to it as was
the butchery of Mac Ian and his clan at Glencoe in 1692, when neither
old man nor child was spared, and fugitives were allowed to perish of
hunger and exposure in the mountains.

Paterson's faith in Panama must have been profound. His wife died
in the new colony, and he himself suffered severely in health; yet,
after his return towards the end of 1699, directly his health began
to improve, we read of his approaching William with a fresh Darien
venture. The King naturally refused to risk a second disaster, and
Paterson, like all great speculators who have risked everything and
lost, could not again persuade the public to share his enthusiasm, for
that mysterious entity seldom trusts a man after a cloud has obscured
his "star." Once his spell of so-called good luck is broken, the public
desert him in a body, when the adventurer, if he be wise, retires into
obscurity with his spoil.

Paterson lived to discover that it is only a rising star, radiating
success, that can obtain a sufficiently large following to finance
a great scheme, and though he strove manfully to promote the new
venture, his sanguine predictions were received sceptically. Nor did
his subsequent schemes meet with a better reception. But he must still
have retained some influence, for, after the Act of Union in 1707,
he was returned to Parliament by a Scotch burgh. His chief claim to
distinction, however, undoubtedly rests upon the fact that he founded
the Bank of England, of which he was appointed one of the first
directors.

The Bank of England, from its inception down to the present day, has
never been a Government institution. It was originally simply a company
that advanced money to and transacted business for the Government,
which, in return, granted it certain privileges and concessions; but
the connection between the Government and the Bank was so close, and
their interests so identical, that public opinion connected the one
indissolubly with the other. From this conception sprang the erroneous
impression that the Bank is a Government establishment, when, in
reality, it is no more so than is the National Provincial Bank of
England or the London and County Bank.

In 1694, the Government of William III., which was generally in a state
of monetary tightness, found that the war with France was draining
its resources, and, having failed to raise sufficient funds by the
imposition of taxes, it resolved, apparently as a kind of _dernier
ressort_, to accept Paterson's financial scheme, which had been shelved
some three years earlier; and on 27th July, 1694, a charter was granted
to the "Corporation of the Governor and Company of the Bank of England."

The capital of the company, £1,200,000, was subscribed by some forty
London merchants, and lent to the Government. It is only reasonable to
assume that the subscribers were supporters of the Government, and that
they were Whigs, whose aim, in supplying William with the sinews of
war, was the crushing of James, whose pusillanimity had disgusted even
his own followers at the battle of the Boyne in 1690.

Then, again, the commercial morality of the Stuarts was notoriously bad
in the City. Charles I., when the City of London refused him a loan,
took forcible possession of £200,000 deposited by the Goldsmiths in
the Exchequer; and Charles II., in 1672, robbed them of considerably
over £1,000,000. The Goldsmiths, in those days, were the private
bankers with whom the London merchants left their cash, receiving an
acknowledgment or receipt in return, promising payment on demand, and
the Goldsmiths deposited their surplus cash in the Exchequer, just as
the banks of to-day do with the Bank of England. Through this act of
spoliation the Goldsmiths were unable to meet their liabilities, and
many of them, together with their customers, were involved in common
ruin in consequence. James II. added to the financial sins of his house
by debasing the currency: so small wonder that the merchants of London
had had enough of the Stuarts, whose theory of the "Divine right" of
kings did not even stop short at the pockets of their subjects--always
their most vulnerable point.

The Bank of England, which to-day is quite outside party politics, was
at its inception a Whig finance company, incorporated solely for the
purpose of lending its capital to the Government at the rate of eight
per cent. per annum; and out of this creation has evolved the present
"Old Lady of Threadneedle Street," whose career, if chequered, has been
one of unquestionable integrity.

It is difficult even in imagination to picture to oneself the England
of 1694; but it is easy to understand that in those days great
storehouses of capital were non-existent--non-existent, that is to
say, in the modern sense. Our huge credit institutions, which are
indispensable in the twentieth century for the proper carrying on of
trade, and which dive by means of branches into almost every corner of
the land, thereby collecting millions of pounds of loanable capital,
would have spread their tentacles in vain during the seventeenth
century, when neither the money nor the facilities for its profitable
employment existed in the country.

Capital was scarce--consequently the rate of interest was high--and
eight per cent. was a rate at which even the Government could not
borrow in the City in 1694, from ten to thirteen per cent. per annum
being about the value of loanable capital, while the commission paid
was oftentimes exorbitant. The Bank, which was established by the
Whigs, was naturally bitterly opposed by the Tories, who saw in its
success the destruction of the cause they had at heart. The capitalist
class disliked it for selfish reasons; and the Goldsmiths, recognising
a formidable opponent, joined issue with its enemies.

Holders of stock and everybody connected with the Bank were looked upon
as enemies of the House of Stuart, which, were it restored to power,
would naturally wreak its vengeance upon a company that had helped to
finance William--for forgiveness is one of those abstract attributes
with which only brave and wise men are blest, and James II. had not
given proof of possessing either courage or wisdom. Small wonder then
that the City should support the Dutchman.

The National Debt, too, was founded during the reign of William, the
first loan of £1,000,000 being raised in 1693, and those persons who
held it were bound by the strongest of ties--commercial ties--to
William. The fund-holders were Liberal; the Bank was Liberal; and as
its very life was dependent upon the existence of the Government, it
seems only natural that, in the popular mind, it should have been
looked upon as a Government institution, though there is but little
excuse for so classing it now. The fact that so many people still share
this illusion, however, clearly proves that a large proportion of the
public is unacquainted with the Bank's history.

The Bank of England's charter was renewed in 1697, and again in 1708,
when, in order to prevent the establishment of similar institutions,
it was granted the monopoly of Joint Stock Banking in England. This it
retained until 1826, when an Act was passed permitting the formation
of Joint Stock Banks of Unlimited Liability beyond sixty-five miles of
London, provided they had no branches in the Metropolis.

It is a long jump from 1708 to 1826, and, of course, the charter was
renewed many times between the two dates, the Government generally
taking advantage of each extension to force some concession from the
Bank, which, as its credit and business expanded, had increased its
original capital by many millions; but 1826 was the year of reform, and
the intervening period possesses little interest except to the student.

Between 1826 and 1829 the Bank opened eleven provincial branches, but
those which were established at Gloucester, Swansea, Exeter, and
Norwich have since been closed. Joint Stock Banks were then started in
the provinces, though not with very happy results, for in 1832 their
reckless trading was severely stigmatised by Lord Overstone; but it
was not until 1834 that the first joint stock bank, the London and
Westminster, was started in London, a clause having been inserted in
the Act when the charter of the Bank of England was renewed in 1833, to
the effect that, provided a joint stock bank did not issue notes, it
was at liberty to carry on business in the City.

Both the Bank of England and the London private bankers opposed the
new bank with acerbity, the former refusing to open an account for it
in its books, and the latter declining to admit it into the Clearing
House. Not satisfied with this, the Bank brought an action against the
Westminster. But it was quite natural that the newcomer should have
been received in this fashion, for innovations, however necessary and
useful, are seldom accepted rapturously in this country, which appears
to have almost a Chinese dislike of the unusual. Besides, it is not the
custom of the country, even for the sake of appearances, to receive a
trade rival with open arms, and it would have been a little surprising
had the Bank surrendered its monopoly of joint stock banking in
England without a struggle, whilst its desire, after being stripped of
some of its privileges, to annoy its despoilers, was, if not laudable,
eminently human.

In 1836 the London Joint Stock Bank followed the example of the
Westminster, and in 1839 the Union Bank of London, which has recently
amalgamated with Messrs. Smiths, opened its doors, while such
well-known banks as the National Provincial Bank of England and the
London and County Bank were formed in 1833 and 1836 respectively. The
trade of the country had by that time far outgrown the resources of the
Bank of England, which was quite unable to minister to the increasing
demands of a prosperous and progressive England; and to-day the only
monopoly which the Bank enjoys is that left to it by the Act of 1844.

From William and Mary to Victoria, in whose reign the Act of 1844--that
Magna Charta of the banking community--was introduced, covers a most
interesting period in the history of the nation, whose development had
been retarded by the "Divine right" of the Stuarts, which cost Charles
I. his head and James II. his throne. The theory is much in evidence
to-day, though it now takes the form of a great abstract idea, not
compatible with practical politics, and which has found a resting place
in the heart, rather than in the head, of the people--for the practical
twentieth century has a strange trick of banishing disproved theories
from the head to the heart; and perhaps it is this national trait which
saves the country from violent revolutions.

It would be a mistake to assert that commerce had declined under
the Stuarts. It increased rapidly in spite of them; but, after the
"Glorious Revolution," the "Divine right" of kings became a mere theory
in this country, and the power of the Crown was made subservient to the
will of the people. In short, the rule of Parliament began. The trade
of the country gradually expanded, and with it the influence of the
Bank.

In order that we may thoroughly grasp the position previously occupied
by the Bank of England, and the influence given to it by its connection
with the Government, it will be better, before briefly discussing the
Act of 1844, to revert to the days when the sway of the Bank of England
was absolute.

In 1708, we know, the Bank was granted the monopoly of joint stock
banking in England, and, further, it was made illegal for any private
firm, whose partners were more than six in number, to conduct the
business of a banker. This restriction was not removed until 1857, when
the partners in a private bank might consist of ten, and it will be
seen from the following facts that this limitation was harmful to the
best interests of the country.

One result of this hard-and-fast enactment was the encouragement of
small private banks in every county of England; but the fact that the
number of their partners was limited to six effectually checked their
expansion, and finally brought hundreds of them to the ground; for
they could not strengthen themselves, and add to their resources, by
amalgamation as is now possible.

As the population of the country increased, the position of the private
bankers, as a class, became precarious, especially in rapidly growing
commercial centres, because their supply of loanable capital was
insufficient to meet the increasing demands of their clients. In their
attempt to finance their customers they neglected to maintain adequate
reserves, and consequently failures were numerous directly any very
considerable demand was made upon them.

Instead of a few large and powerful banking companies, there existed
numerous weak private firms, which, in many instances, had advanced out
of all proportion to their total working resources, thereby sacrificing
security to large profits. So long as times were good all went merrily;
but, unfortunately, the great impetus given to trade by the conclusion
of peace with France and the United States in 1783 did not last more
than five or six years.

The year 1789 brings us to the French Revolution, and in 1793 we were
at war with France again. Then came the reaction. Country bankers
failed in every direction; but in 1797 Mr. Pitt came to the rescue in
order to relieve the Bank of England, and the directors of the Bank
were allowed to issue notes at their discretion, cash payments being
suspended. Between 1792 and 1820 over one thousand private bankers put
up their shutters; and during the 1825 crisis sixty-five banks closed
their doors, hundreds of their customers being ruined in consequence.
The panic of 1825, which almost emptied the Bank's tills, thoroughly
convinced the Government that the country had outgrown the monopoly of
the Bank of England.

By limiting the partners in private banking companies to six in number,
and prohibiting the establishment of joint stock banks in opposition
to the Bank of England, the Government sanctioned a policy which could
not but result in disaster. Like most monopolies, that of the Bank
of England was framed to exclude powerful rivals, and to keep those
in opposition small and weak; and the result was disaster and ruin
in every direction. The greater the trade of the country, the more
apparent became the evil, until even the Government was compelled to
decide that the monopoly of the Bank of England must forthwith be
curtailed.

Small tradesmen were quick to realise the possibilities attached to an
unlimited issue of notes, and hundreds of them combined the business of
banking with their retail trades, for, although the law placed every
obstacle in the way of sound banking, it encouraged small men, who
possessed little or no capital, to engage in a business which should be
conducted with much capital and great caution. The country was flooded
with the notes of these so-called bankers, who, directly their notes
were presented for payment in large numbers, failed by the dozen.

A system which encouraged all that was bad, and excluded everything
that was sound and secure, was naturally doomed to extinction; and
small wonder that in 1826 the era of country joint stock banking began.
Like most fresh ventures which cannot be guided by precedent, it began
disastrously, for the simple reason that those who were responsible for
the guidance of the new companies had to learn from experience--a very
bitter school. But the new banks laboured under fewer disadvantages
than the old private bankers, and the Bank Act of 1844, we shall see,
clearly defined their position.

We can now understand why the private banker was never a great success
in this country. He was of course sacrificed to the monopoly of the
Bank of England; for although six very rich capitalists could conduct
a large banking business, the resources at their command would not
be sufficient to enable them to extend their branches throughout the
country. Consequently, before the advent of the joint stock banks we
find the private banker, broadly speaking, confining his connections to
a particular district or county.

It is true that he enjoyed free trade in banking down to 1844; but the
regulation as to the number of partners in his business necessarily
confined his offices or branches to a limited area, and effectually
prevented his expansion on a large scale; so we get influential houses
in the various counties, such as the Gurneys in Norfolk and Suffolk,
the Smiths in Nottingham, and so on. It is noticeable, however, that
both these well-known private firms, recognising the applicability
of the joint stock system to the times, have surrendered their note
issues, and taken a place in the modern movement, evidently foreseeing
that, in order to progress, they must adopt the methods of their more
successful rivals.

Undoubtedly, the country was not ripe for such a movement until the
beginning of the nineteenth century; and though the number of partners
in private banking firms was extended to ten in 1857, this concession
by no means placed the private banker on an equal footing with the
joint stock companies, which could increase their members or partners
by the issue of additional capital whenever it became apparent that
their business was rapidly progressing. The private banker, had he
desired to farm some dozen counties, would have been compelled to find
a few large capitalists to join hands with him, whereas the joint
stock banks had only to obtain hundreds of very small ones, and it is
quite evident that the companies possessed infinitely the easier task.
In fact, down to 1844 the monopoly of the Bank of England prevented
their rapid growth. Then came the period of, so to speak, free banking;
but not for the private firms.

People are constantly asking: Why did not the private bankers establish
themselves firmly in the country and progress? They were first in the
field, and, had they been well managed, surely they would have been as
progressive as their joint stock rivals.

But we know that the law never gave them the remotest chance. How could
they progress on a really gigantic scale when their partners were
limited to six? The law literally forced them to stand aside; and in
1826 and 1833 only the joint stock system profited by the concessions
wrung from the Bank of England, because by that system alone could
sufficient capital be obtained to enable a bank to farm the country
from south of the Tweed to Land's End.

Of course the private banker was at liberty to adopt the joint stock
system at an earlier date, but he did not at first believe in the new
movement, and, consequently, clung to his own system until he was far
outdistanced by his competitors, for directly the country was relieved
from the incubus in the shape of the Bank of England's monopoly, and
the joint stock system was given a free hand, that system, as might
have been expected, instantly began to forge ahead, and in a very short
space of time the private banker, who to this day cannot admit more
than ten persons into partnership, was left hopelessly behind by a
system which was unfettered by legal restrictions and allowed fair play.

The Bank of England's monopoly reduced the private banker to impotency.
It fostered in every county of England dangerously small firms, which
disappeared in hundreds as soon as credit became bad and a state of
panic caused their notes to be presented for payment in unusually large
numbers, and it made really great private banking companies impossible
in England; while but for the fact that public opinion wrenched this
power from the hands of the directors, the Bank and its monopoly, which
encouraged a dangerous form of banking, might both have been swept away
in a bad financial crisis.

Fortunately, public opinion won the day; and though the private banker
could not compete successfully against the joint stock system on
account of the smallness of his capital compelling him to concentrate
his energies in a particular district, that system, being unrestricted,
soon covered the land with its branches. The private bankers were at
first held in check by the Bank of England's monopoly. Now they are
simply being smothered out of existence by the extension of a system
of which, in a manner, though, of course, not in the modern sense, the
Bank was the first exponent; for a banker, at the beginning of the
nineteenth century, was largely dependent upon his note circulation for
his profit, our present system of deposit banking being then in its
infancy. In fact, the one evolved out of the other.

If a person held one hundred pounds in bank notes, it could not but
occur to him that he was in reality lending the issuer one hundred
pounds entirely free of interest; and as he possessed sufficient
confidence in the banker to lock up the notes in his cash box, it was
only going one step farther to deposit his money at his bank and draw
out the cash as he required it. Obviously, too, if he exchanged the
notes for a deposit receipt, he would receive some interest upon his
money; and as the receipt could be held equally as safely as the notes,
he naturally adopted the plan that was the more profitable to himself.
So, although in 1826 the joint stock banks in the country attached
great importance to their circulation, their notes rather took the form
of an advertising medium for attracting deposits, or, at least, became
a means to that end, for the progressive banks did not hesitate to
sacrifice their note issues in order that they might open branches in
London.

We find, then, that the joint stock banks at first attempted to place
as many of their notes as possible among the public, and that, by the
process already explained, the holders of their notes gradually began
to deposit with them, until, by degrees, our present system of deposit
banking obtained a firm hold upon the habits of the people. As the
trade of the country expanded, the cheque rapidly drove out a large
proportion of the bank notes in circulation; and though the issue of
notes certainly introduced deposit banking in this country, modern
requirements have made cheques and bills of exchange the media for
the transference of credit. Such being the case, the note issues of
the larger joint stock banks became of secondary importance to them;
and, rather than remain outside the Metropolis, we have seen that they
sacrificed their notes to the monopoly of the Bank of England.

From 1708 to 1826 the Bank of England owed its predominant position
entirely to monopoly, and enough has been written to show that its sway
was not an unmixed blessing to the country. The private banker, without
a shadow of doubt, can trace his lack of progress to the restrictions
placed upon his business by the Bank charter; and the joint stock
companies may certainly be said to have succeeded in spite of the
Bank; yet no greater compliment can be paid to any institution than to
assert that it has earned the respect, if not the love, of its enemies;
and such undoubtedly may be truthfully affirmed of the "Old Lady of
Threadneedle Street," even when her rule was autocratic and her rivals'
dislike of her intense.




CHAPTER II.

Before and After the Act of 1844.


We have seen that part of the Bank of England's monopoly was annulled
in 1826, and that in 1833 a clause was inserted in the charter to the
effect that joint stock banks of unlimited liability could open in
London, provided they did not issue notes; and though the state of the
law still allowed the Bank to harass and annoy the new companies, its
power was thoroughly broken, and its monopoly of joint stock banking
gone--fortunately for ever.

The country enjoyed a period of prosperity from 1833 to 1836, but the
speculative fever soon began to develop, and by the end of 1835 it was
burning fiercely, for men and women possessed an extraordinary faith
in those much advertised short cuts to wealth in the early thirties.
No path, if it were sufficiently short, was too precipitous. Hope was
boundless, credit was unlimited, and companies in profusion were formed
by the philanthropists and dreamers of those times.

Then came the crisis of 1837, when the Bank's policy rose almost to the
verge of madness. Just at a critical moment, when it was imperative
that no untoward incident should occur to disturb the already depressed
state of credit, the Bank of England refused, and persisted in its
refusal, to discount bills bearing the endorsement of the joint stock
banks.

The action of the Bank added to the confusion, and, as speculation in
America had been rampant, it dealt a final blow to the houses engaged
in the American trade by issuing instructions that their bills also
should not be discounted. Then, as might have been expected, the fury
of the storm beat against the Bank itself; and by the end of February,
1837, its bullion was reduced to £4,077,000. In 1839 another crisis
occurred, and the bullion declined to £2,522,000. Upon this occasion
£2,500,000 was borrowed from the Bank of France, and the discount rate
of the Bank of England was gradually advanced to six per cent.

These constantly recurring panics thoroughly alarmed the Government,
which, having stripped the Bank of England of its monopoly of joint
stock banking, now turned its attention to the currency, and by the
Bank Act of 1844 secured the convertibility of the note. In fact, the
chief aim of the Act was to reduce the issues of the country bankers,
who, by forcing large numbers of their one pound notes into circulation
and neglecting to maintain a sufficient proportion of cash in hand to
meet them on presentation, helped to finance the gamble of 1824. Some
of the banks paid the penalty in the year following, and disappeared
from the scene.

In 1821 the Bank of England, after a period of restriction, began to
pay off its notes under the value of £5, but the Government allowed the
country bankers to continue issuing their small notes until the expiry
of the Bank Charter in 1833. In 1826 an Act was passed prohibiting the
stamping of notes under £5, and forbidding the circulation after April,
1829, of those then current.

The Bank Act of 1844 confirmed the alterations of 1826 and 1833, and,
in addition, made great alterations in connection with the currency.
The Issue Department of the Bank of England was to be kept entirely
distinct from the Banking Department. Notes, to the extent of
£14,000,000, might be issued against the debt owing by the Government
to the Bank and against other securities, but coin and bullion must be
deposited in the Issue Department against every note issued in excess
of that sum.

Notes issued by the Bank of England are, therefore, secured principally
by specie, and by the Government debt, which amounts (1902) to
£11,015,100; and as every note is a warrant entitling the holder to
gold on demand, a Bank of England note is really and truly equivalent
to gold. However, under certain possible, if improbable, conditions,
the Bank could not fulfil its obligations or promises to pay cash
on presentation, for if all its notes in circulation were presented
simultaneously there would not be sufficient coin in the Issue
Department to meet them; but that is a most unlikely contingency.

Further, these notes are "legal tender" in England. In other words,
a debtor can compel his creditor to accept them in discharge of his
debt; but nobody is obliged to give out change should the value of the
notes tendered exceed the amount of the sum owing. In Scotland and
Ireland Bank of England notes are "current" but not "legal" tender.
Neither are they by the Bank itself, nor by any of its branches, and
sovereigns, though not half-sovereigns or silver, may be demanded in
exchange. All notes are convertible at the London Office of the Bank,
whose branches, however, are only responsible for those notes issued
therefrom.

The Bank still retains the monopoly of issuing notes in London and at a
distance not greater than sixty-five miles from the Metropolis. No new
bank of issue may be formed; and as the private bankers in London had
ceased circulating their notes prior to 1844, the Act practically gave
the Bank the monopoly of note issue within the prescribed area. This
monopoly alone is of great value; but when we remember that its notes
are legal tender in England as well, it is evident that the Bank of
England still enjoys a most important concession.

The private bankers of London, and the joint stock banks in London and
within sixty-five miles of it, were debarred by the Act of 1844 from
issuing notes. Of course the private bankers who still issued notes
within the prescribed space retained their privilege, but they were no
longer able to circulate as many as they could persuade the public to
accept.

Bankers, both joint stock and private, who claimed the privilege of
issuing notes were compelled to make a return of their issues for a
period of twelve weeks to a given date, when the average amount was
ascertained, and the extent of the future issue of each bank settled
in accordance therewith. The issues, in other words, were fixed, and
they could not exceed the sum authorised without breaking the law,
and exposing themselves to a fine equivalent to the average excess
during any one month. The Government, anxious to avoid a repetition of
the scandals of 1825 and 1836, was evidently determined to limit the
note circulations of the country banks, and there seems little doubt
that, when the Act was framed, one of its aims was the slow but sure
extermination of the country bank note.

Banks which intend giving up their note circulations may compound with
the Bank of England, which is then allowed to increase its own issue by
two-thirds of the disappearing issues. The Government, however, takes
all the profit accruing from such arrangements.

The result of these regulations can be seen in the accretions made
from time to time to the Bank's authorised issue of £14,000,000, which
has now increased to £18,175,000. The majority of the issues of the
private bankers fixed by the Act of 1844 have since lapsed; and the
same may be said of the more progressive of the country joint stock
banks, which, as their deposits grew, opened branches in London,
thereby sacrificing their note circulations to the monopoly of the Bank
of England, whose notes are fast driving those of the small country
bankers out of circulation. Broadly speaking, it may be said that Bank
of England notes are the only notes accepted readily by the English
public; but the mere fact of their being legal tender ensures that.

Readers who are not acquainted with the history of Banking must not
assume that the Act of 1844 affects either Scotland or Ireland. The
note circulation of both those countries is regulated by the Act of
1845, but in neither country are the provisions identically the same as
those affecting England.

Any person may demand of the Issue Department notes in exchange for
gold bullion of standard fineness at the rate of £3 17s. 9d. per ounce.

The Bank Act of 1844, according to its framers, would make panics and
crises evils of the past; but, as a matter of fact, it was a new broom,
and its sweeping powers were greatly overestimated. Its provisions, we
can see, related entirely to currency reform; and though the country
bankers could no longer borrow on their notes to an unlimited extent,
it must be remembered that Sir Robert Peel's famous Act, if it fixed
the maximum amount of their issues, did not take the precaution to
also fix the minimum reserve of cash in hand to be held against them.
Obviously, no Act could strengthen the position of the banks against
panics unless it laid down the minimum or legal reserve of cash to be
maintained against deposits, and we shall see that, in this respect,
the Act of 1844 did not realise expectations.

Controversy raged furiously around Peel's Act, and, needless to say, it
became the bone of party contention. Whenever a subject reaches that
stage in this country, its merits are forced into the background. Sides
are taken, critics and politicians range themselves upon either the
one or the other, and the subject, consequently, speedily gets all the
truth lashed out of it. The number of people who really understand the
question thoroughly is infinitesimal; and they, as a rule, by a strange
irony of fate, do not dabble in politics. The important subject is
therefore handed over to the tender mercies of the multitude, which,
quite ignorant of its underlying principles, splits itself into two
hostile camps, beats out the dust with sticks, and then returns a man
to Parliament to vote on this side or on that.

When in 1847, three years after the passing of the Act, another crisis
occurred, public opinion attached all the blame to Peel's Act; but
public opinion was wrong. Public opinion is usually based upon instinct
rather than upon reason, and, consequently, carried away by a sense of
indignation or wrong, it rushes madly at what it considers the cause of
the mischief. In this case its bugbear was Peel's Act. The real reason
was to be found in the simple fact that neither the Bank of England nor
any of the large banks held a sufficient proportion of cash in hand
to meet those sudden demands for gold which may be made upon a banker
at any moment, and to which his business is peculiarly exposed during
periods of bad credit.

It was the old, old story, which in these days seems hardly to require
an explanation. After a period of exceptional prosperity, there almost
invariably follows a lean year or two, when loanable capital is
cheap and the prices of commodities depressed. Then is the company
promoter's opportunity, and schemes, wise and otherwise, are brought
to the notice of the public. Presently there comes a gradual expansion
of enterprise, and rising prices beget confidence, when a whisper goes
round to the effect that good times are coming.

At first business improves slowly and surely. Then, as prices mount
higher and higher, every producer increases his output, anxious to
share in the general prosperity. Suddenly, just before the end, there
is a boom. Prices rush madly upwards, until every prudent man sees
that business has degenerated into a mere gamble, and that he must act
quickly if he does not wish to be caught by the receding tide. Unless
the banks are strong at that moment, disaster is inevitable; and as
they had not taken the necessary precaution in 1847, the result was a
crisis.

Capital was cheap during the last quarter of 1844, the Bank rate
remaining stationary at two-and-a-half per cent. from September of that
year to October, 1845. Cheap money gives the promoter his opportunity;
and in 1845 the railway mania was at its zenith. England was in the
hands of the surveyor, and the "boom" began in real earnest. As usual,
everybody was to become immensely rich, and, as usual, most people
were again bitterly disappointed. By a strange process of reasoning,
experience does not count in finance. Hope, after a very little while,
drives out of the memory of human beings the nightmare of disaster;
so, in an astonishingly short space of time, they are gambling again.
The crisis of 1837 had lost all its significance by 1845; and then, of
course, the Bank Act was to prevent commercial panics in the future!

At the end of 1846 the Bank rate was raised to four per cent., and in
October, 1847, it touched eight per cent. The speculation in railways
naturally resulted in a gamble in iron; and, after the terrible famine
in Ireland of 1846, when thousands died of fever and want in their
wretched hovels and even on the roadsides, the suspension of the Corn
Laws led to large importations of foreign grain. A sudden fall in
prices immediately followed the increased supply, and the merchants in
Mark Lane began to fail. Then people looked gravely at one another, and
inquired what would happen next.

Credit is the disposition of one person to trust another; therefore
as business gradually expands, credit or confidence increases at
precisely the same ratio; and when prices are high and profits large,
the impression prevails that everybody is making money--consequently,
confidence begins to drive out caution; so, towards the end of a
period of prosperity the acquisitive fever burns fiercely. Everybody
is in mad haste to get rich; caution is flung to the winds; and we
get a _débâcle_. Then follows a time of bad credit. That is to say,
immediately after the reaction, everyone is disposed to be sceptical
of his neighbour's position, to wonder whether he were hit by the
recent upheaval, and to be extremely cautious in granting credit to his
customers. This took place after the crisis of 1847. For a little while
everybody was afraid to trust his neighbour; but by 1857 speculation
was in full swing again, and the inevitable collapse followed. These
periods of good and bad times, or good and bad credit, run their course
with the regularity of a fever.

So it was in 1847. Directly a few failures were announced, the public
became alarmed, and speculation received a check. The failures
continued, and every holder of bills, anxious to have money at his
credit at the banks, tried to discount them. But the banks were
totally unprepared for this sudden demand, and in Liverpool and
Newcastle some of them closed their doors. The London bankers refused
their customers ordinary accommodation, and the Bank of England at
first declined to advance against securities. Bills, consequently,
could not be met at maturity, and the result was panic and a run on the
banks.

The situation was saved by the suspension of the recently passed Bank
Act, and on 25th October, 1847, the Government authorised the Bank
of England to issue notes at its discretion, until the feeling of
apprehension had subsided. The Bank thereupon advanced on bills and
stock, and, although the rate of discount was eight per cent., the fact
that money could be obtained on good bills and first-class securities
speedily allayed the panic, and by 23rd November following the Act was
again in force. Further, the amount issued by the Bank beyond the limit
imposed thereby did not exceed £400,000, although its reserve, by 23rd
October, was reduced to £1,547,000.

Perhaps we shall now be better able to understand the Act of 1844, and
to see that, though it effected a most useful reform in the currency,
and prevented a host of weak country bankers inundating the provinces
with their doubtful paper, it does not contain a single clause which
would either prevent or alleviate a panic. Indeed the paradox is that
during a crisis relief can only be obtained by breaking the Act, and
allowing the Bank of England to advance notes freely against the
better-class securities. The power to issue notes was taken out of the
hands of numerous weak banks, and confided to one strong one. Perhaps,
however, it would be more correct to say that the power for evil of the
small country bankers was "fixed" by the Act; and, as we have seen,
the Bank of England's notes are gradually driving those of the English
provincial banks out of circulation. Then, again, the extinction of the
country issues gave a marked impetus to our modern system of deposit
banking. The cheque soon became the principal credit document in
circulation, and the country joint stock banks relied absolutely for
their advancement upon their ability to attract deposits to their books.

So long as the Bank of England's notes can be exchanged for gold
on demand, it is impossible for them to depreciate in value, and
they cannot drive more gold out of the country than is equal to the
Bank's fixed or authorised maximum, because, against every note
issued in excess, specie for a like amount must be deposited in the
Issue Department. Certain writers urge that this limitation is an
interference with the freedom of the banker; but, seeing that our
modern system of banking rests upon so small a cash basis, surely it
is absolutely essential that our currency at least should be above
suspicion in times of falling credit. The public does not require notes
then. It wants credit; and this it obtains in the books of the banks.

The currency, certainly, should be left absolutely to the laws of
supply and demand; and though it is true that the Bank of England
sometimes has to protect the convertibility of its notes by raising its
rate of discount, still, our present system approaches very near to
perfection in so far as the exchange of the note for gold is concerned,
and it certainly does not seem desirable to have the country again
flooded with paper money which may, or may not, be paid on presentation.

Any person who possesses gold can have it turned into coin immediately;
so, under our present system, every addition to the currency must come
either direct from the mines or else be received in settlement of the
balance of indebtedness owing by foreign nations to this country. We
are, therefore, spared those evils which result from an over-issue
of paper, and which were sometimes so greatly in evidence before the
passing of the Act of 1844.

The absurdity of the attack on the Act must now be apparent, inasmuch
as the only reform it could possibly effect was a currency reform,
which was certainly badly needed. Viewed in that light it must surely
be acknowledged that the Bank Act of 1844 is one of the soundest
financial Bills that has ever become an Act of Parliament. The fact
that, in spite of the great change in our banking system--which may be
said to have been revolutionised since 1844--the Act has successfully
stood the test of time, is also proof positive (if proof were required)
that it was framed with great skill and judgment.

Had the Act further decreed that every bank should maintain a ratio
of, say, at least eighteen per cent. of legal tender against its
public liabilities, even panics might have been avoided. At any rate,
the banks would have been better prepared to meet drains upon their
resources, though even then--as has been pointed out is the case with
the Act itself--the law would have to be broken directly a run was
made on the banks by their customers. For all that, such a regulation
would keep the banks in a fair state of preparedness during normal
times, and consequently every bank in the land would be ready to face a
panic.

Our system of credit is based on a small cash reserve; and it would be
impossible to devise any workable scheme which would afford bankers
absolute security, because it would prove too costly both to the banks
themselves and to their customers, who would have to pay much higher
rates in proportion as the depositors' money was secured. The most
prudent banker can only insure his business up to a certain point, as,
if he kept more than a certain proportion of cash in hand, he would
conduct his business at a loss; so if a panic take possession of his
customers and they rush for gold, he is lost if the demand should drain
his reserve and encroach on his till-money. No system in the world
could possibly save him then. The most our banks can do, therefore,
is to be prepared to a certain extent, and, viewed in the light of
past history, it is criminal of directors not to take the ordinary
precautions. A clause in the Act, as already suggested, would at least
ensure a fair state of preparedness in all our banking companies, and
beyond that it is impossible to go.

It has been shown that the Act works most effectively in a time of
panic when it is broken. It is, perhaps, interesting to recall that
the Bank of Germany, in order to remedy this defect, is allowed to
issue notes beyond the authorised amount at its own discretion; but
the German Government, in order to check abuses, makes over-issue an
unprofitable transaction for the Bank by imposing a fine of five per
cent. on any amount issued in excess of the authorised limit. Were our
own Government to adopt the same expedient, the Bank of England, during
a time of stress and excitement, could meet all demands automatically,
and the Act would be almost perfect of itself. On the other hand, the
Government might not like to see so much power pass into the hands of
the directors of the Bank, though there can be little doubt that they
would use it with the greatest moderation and to the public advantage.

The object of this chapter is to show that panics were not lessened
in any degree by the Act, and perhaps it may be said that the fact
has been dinned into one's ears to the verge of irritation. But an
ardent reformer's feelings are strong, and it is difficult to make
this subject clear to those who are not conversant with the history of
Banking, and who, perhaps, are disposed to think the subject both dry
and uninteresting.

The panic of 1847 was followed by another in 1857, and in 1866 the
Overend and Gurney crisis occurred. From 1866 down to the present day,
unless we include the Baring scare in 1890, the country has been free
from these scourges, and the reason is not very far to seek.

The Act of 1844 placed the currency of the country on a sound basis,
and experience, by teaching the banks caution, did the rest. The
large banking companies, after the terrible panic of 1866, plainly
recognised that advances must be made with great discretion, and that,
if they valued their own safety, speculation must be either kept
well within bounds or discouraged entirely. Merchants and traders
who require capital for speculative purposes can only obtain it by
making application to the banks, which, in the very great majority of
instances, now refuse to make advances unless tangible securities be
deposited to cover their loans.

Merchants, therefore, unless their credit be exceptionally good, or
unless they possess first-rate stocks and shares, cannot speculate
to the same extent as was possible forty years ago and, of course,
those persons who possess marketable securities, which bring them in
incomes, are the last people in the world to risk an assured position
for possible great future gain. They are accustomed to the good things
of this earth, and though they may earnestly desire a large accretion
to their wealth, the thought that, in the event of failure, they may
lose what they already possess, checks the impulse to finance a scheme,
which, while holding out promises of great success, is also not without
possibilities of grave disaster. As a rule, only small men will take
such risks, and the banks will not finance them at any price.

By refusing to accommodate weak speculators, the banks have kept
business in a healthy channel, and have largely confined speculation
to those people who can afford to pay their losses--always a cautious
class. The rank speculator, therefore, has been driven to outside
houses, and such houses, we know, are constantly failing; but Lombard
Street, having weeded this dangerous element out of its system, is now
more stable.

Recognising that their system of credit is always exposed to possible
disaster, and having had the fact brought forcibly home to them upon
so many occasions, the banks, since 1866, have gradually accumulated
larger and larger cash reserves in order to be better prepared to deal
immediately and effectively with those cataclysms which from time to
time are certain to assail them; and though it is an open question
whether their reserves are even now sufficient, the most casual
observer must acknowledge that, with a few exceptions, our banking
companies are in a better state of preparedness at the moment than
perhaps during any other period of their history.

By compelling the schemers to deposit securities against their loans
and advances the banks secure themselves against large bad debts; and
by accumulating fair cash reserves they insure their business against
suspension during panics. Having taken these precautions, it is not
surprising that their path has been rendered comparatively smooth
during recent years; and, further, the more prudent manner in which the
business of a banker is now conducted makes the shares of the large
banking companies less speculative holdings, and greatly reduces the
risks of shareholders in connection with their liabilities on the
uncalled portion of their shares, though that liability should by no
means be forgotten or accepted in any other light than that of serious
responsibility.

This brings us to another point in their history. It was not until 1858
that banks could be registered as limited liability companies, and,
needless to say, no unlimited bank has been formed since that date;
whilst every joint stock bank now in existence (although, in the great
majority of instances, the members are liable for certain known sums on
each share held by them) has limited the liability of its shareholders,
those companies formed prior to 1858 having since taken the necessary
steps.

Naturally, persons of wealth would not risk their fortunes by holding
shares in an unlimited bank, but now that the exact liability is known
the responsibility is accepted with a lighter heart, and, consequently,
this class of security is considered a desirable investment by those
who can afford to take a little risk in return for higher interest than
that yielded by the so-called "gilt-edged" variety of securities.

The reader cannot but be struck by the gradual evolution of our banking
system; and it must be evident to him that the present more secure
position is the outcome of a bitter struggle with adversity. It is
usual, when discussing the Bank of England's position in the money
market, to degenerate into abuse, and to show that the Old Lady of
Threadneedle Street has committed every conceivable folly in dealing
with questions of finance. No doubt the accusations are true in the
light of past experience. But they were the follies of her times, and,
if we are to believe the critics, we are not greatly in advance of our
own. Then is it not a little unreasonable to expect the Bank directors
of 1825 to be in advance of the financial opinion then current in the
City? They had the very best advice of the day at their disposal, and
had the present-day critics lived in 1825 they would have urged the
Bank directors to take the very course that was then adopted.

English history, at a certain period, seems an account of one long
struggle between the will of the people and the power of the Crown; and
Banking history, prior to 1844, reads like one long struggle between
the banks and the Bank of England. But there is this distinction, to
wit, the sterling honesty of the Bank. Surely, in the whole world's
history there is not another such instance of unbroken faith on the
part of a financial institution which has enjoyed a life of more than
two hundred years. While anxious to give an accurate account of the
Bank's history, and to explain all its faults and all its failings, it
is impossible, the closer one examines its actions, not to be the more
impressed by its honesty of purpose.

Every new movement gropes its way out of the darkness into the light.
The process is, however, a slow one; and if, in the future, there are
new problems to be solved, then future generations will have to learn
the laws affecting them in the school of experience. Despite their
increased knowledge, they will probably make the same mistakes as those
recorded in these chapters, for it is astonishing, as our environment
changes, how short a distance we can see in front of our noses. Banking
in 1950 will in all probability be very different to banking in
1902--especially if population increases at its present rate all the
world over.




CHAPTER III.

The Bank's Weekly Return.


For the nonce we have finished with history, and will turn our
attention to the Bank of England as it now stands in the centre of the
Money Market. The joint stock banks publish their balance sheets either
annually or half-yearly; but the Bank of England, in compliance with
the Act, compiles a weekly statement to the close of business each
Wednesday. This Return or Balance Sheet is submitted to the directors
on the following day, and, when passed by them, is exhibited on the
wall of the Bank to an expectant crowd of messengers and officials,
whose business it is either to criticise or copy it. But by far the
greater number of the persons there assembled merely wish to know
whether any alteration has been made by the directors in the Bank's
discount rate, and, that ascertained, the crowd rapidly thins.

The following is a copy of the Return or Balance Sheet for the week
ended Wednesday, 1st October, 1902:--

ISSUE DEPARTMENT.

                      £           |                         £
                                  |
  Notes Issued   51,792,330       | Government
                                  | Debt               11,015,100
                                  |
                                  | Other Securities    7,159,900
                                  |
                                  | Gold Coin and
                                  | Bullion            33,617,330
                -------------     |                  -------------
                 £51,792,330      |                   £51,792,330
                =============     |                  =============

BANKING DEPARTMENT.

           Liabilities.           |         Assets.
                                  |
                         £        |                         £

  Proprietors'                    | Government
  Capital           14,553,000    | Securities         15,826,080
                                  |
  Rest               3,816,736    | Other Securities   31,837,516
                                  |
  Public Deposits                 | Notes              21,391,145
                                  |
  (Including Exchequer,           | Gold and Silver
  Savings' Bank, Commissioners    | Coin                2,225,084
  of National                     |
  Debt, and Dividend              |
  accounts)         10,025,973    |
                                  |
  Other Deposits    42,695,526    |
                                  |
  Seven-day and                   |
  other Bills          188,590    |
                  -------------   |                  -------------
                   £71,279,825    |                   £71,279,825
                  =============   |                  =============

A glance at the right hand side of the statement relating to the Issue
Department tells us that every note, either in the hands of the public
or held in reserve in the Banking Department, is covered by securities
and specie deposited in the Issue Department. The amount of the notes
in circulation is, of course, obtained by deducting the notes in hand
in the Banking Department from the total amount of Notes Issued on the
left-hand side of the Issue Department. The difference, £30,401,185,
is called the "circulation," and represents the sum which the Bank of
England had borrowed from the public on its notes on the 1st October
last.

Each department is distinct, and has, in fact, a separate existence;
so if the Banking Department requires gold, it must, like an ordinary
individual, exchange some of its notes in hand at the Issue Department,
obtaining therefrom the additional coin to satisfy the demands of its
customers in the Banking Department.

The Bank has transferred the Government debt and other securities,
which together amount to £18,175,000, to the Issue Department, and this
sum is called the "authorised issue," for the simple reason that the
Government allows the Bank to issue notes for a like amount against
these securities, which are mortgaged to the holders of its notes.
Gold coin and bullion, we know, must be deposited against every note
issued in excess of this sum; and as both sides of the statement agree,
it is evident that this has been done. These £51,000,000 of gold and
securities, then, are hypothecated to the holders of the Bank's notes,
and, in the event of the Bank of England being wound up, the creditors
in the Banking Department could not touch either the securities or the
gold. But we see that the Bank holds £21,391,145 of its own notes in
the Banking Department, and, of course, these notes are secured in the
same manner as those held by the public; consequently, this department
enjoys similar rights and privileges in respect of them. Add the notes
in hand in the Banking Department to the "circulation," and it will be
found that the total equals the amount issued.

It follows that the Bank only makes a profit on the authorised portion
of its note issue, for, as gold is deposited against the remainder,
it must lose thereupon to the extent of the cost of production of the
notes issued in excess. Obviously, then, the Act does not limit the
note issue of the Bank, but it does limit that portion which is not
covered by gold, and, consequently, it removes the probability of our
seeing Bank of England notes at a discount, as was the case during the
early part of the nineteenth century, for the fact that the Bank of
England is compelled to redeem its notes in gold on demand prevents
depreciation of its paper.

Of course, the amount of notes in circulation varies from day to day,
and so, too, does the amount of notes issued, which rises and falls
as the stock of bullion in the Issue Department is either increased
or diminished. Every note paid is immediately cancelled, and no note,
after it has been changed at the Bank, ever goes into circulation
again. Hence the reason why Bank of England notes present such a marked
contrast to the notes of the country bankers, who issue their paper
over and over again, until it becomes quite unpleasant to handle, and
distinctly malodorous.

The Bank of England may be said to perform four separate functions.
Its Issue Department, as we have seen, is responsible for the
notes. Secondly, the Bank manages the National Debt on behalf of
the Government. Thirdly, in consequence of its holding the bankers'
reserves, it acts as agent for the Mint. And, fourthly, it conducts an
ordinary banking business, but it includes among its customers the
largest and most influential depositor and borrower in the Kingdom, to
wit, the British Government.

The Banking Department, which we will next discuss, stands quite by
itself. The first entry on the left-hand side of the balance sheet,
we can see, consists of the Bank's capital. Then follows the "rest"
or reserve fund, which is never allowed to fall below £3,000,000, the
accretions made thereto from time to time representing the profits of
the Bank, which are distributed among the stockholders in the shape of
dividend after the close of each half-year on the 5th April and the 5th
October.

The third entry on the statement, Public Deposits, is made up of the
various Government balances; and Other Deposits, which form by far
the largest debit in the balance sheet, comprise current account and
bankers' balances, the latter largely predominating. Since 1877 the
Bank has not published the sum standing to the credit of the London
bankers in its books; and as this deposit represents the reserve upon
which the bankers might have to draw in the event of a panic, it seems
an error of judgment not to give publicity to the figures, even if they
do show how largely the Bank of England is dependent upon the other
banks for its own working resources.

Public or Government Deposits and Other Deposits stand in a very
peculiar relation to each other, and, before discussing the October
return, it is perhaps desirable to illustrate this relation. The fiscal
year ends on the 5th April; consequently, the Government is busily
engaged in collecting the revenue during January, February, and March.
"Other Deposits" are often referred to as the market fund of cash, and
as those persons who pay their taxes draw cheques upon their bankers,
it follows that during these months huge sums are transferred from the
bankers' balances (Other Deposits) to the credit of Public Deposits,
which are consequently swollen appreciably.

Bankers' balances being reduced, the banks have therefore less to
lend; and if the demand for loanable capital is brisk at the time,
borrowers are driven to the Bank of England, which sometimes has to
raise its rate of discount in order to protect its reserve. Payment of
instalments upon Government loans and large issues of Treasury bills
produce a like effect.

On the 5th October (four days after the date of the return under
discussion) a quarterly instalment on the National Debt is due. Then
credit flows from Government Deposits back to Other Deposits. The banks
can lend freely again, and the Bank of England, in order to attract
borrowers, may even have to lower its rates. Undoubtedly, this is a
somewhat artificial state of affairs, because money at times is made
either cheap or dear, not solely as the result of demand and supply,
but partly according to the personality of the holders of the loanable
capital when the demand arises.

A glance at the return shows us that there is a balance of over
£10,000,000 against Government Deposits. This implies that the Bank
has control of the money market, that many of the bill brokers,
finding Lombard Street empty, have been compelled to borrow from the
Bank, which puts on the screw as demands upon its resources increase.
Further, rates are not likely to be easier until money is released by
the Government. Were the banks to keep their own reserves, and did the
Government deposit with three or four of the strongest of them, then
this constantly recurring tightness would not occur; but under our one
reserve system it is unavoidable. However, it by no means follows
that the average rate of discount would be lower under such a system.
Indeed, the probability is that it would be much higher, because the
banks would be compelled to keep larger reserves, and, consequently,
would have less to lend.

The last amount on the liability side of the statement is £188,590,
which is owing by the Bank on bills in circulation. Shortly after the
passing of the Act, and before the joint stock banks had accumulated
their vast deposits, the Bank of England issued a much larger volume
of these post bills; but since the country banks have been able to
draw upon their London agents and head offices in London, the Bank's
bills in circulation have gradually dropped from well over £1,000,000
to their present figures. The last three entries, when added together,
give us the amount of the Bank's indebtedness to the Government and
to the public; and the aggregate, £71,279,825, represents the total
liabilities of the Banking Department. But a company, if it be solvent,
must possess assets for a like sum, and these we find on the right hand
or credit side of the statement.

Nearly £16,000,000 are invested in Government securities; and though
any advances made to the Government by the Bank on deficiency bills
are included therewith, the description is correct, as a loan to the
British Government is as safe as Consols. Just before the dividends on
the funds fall due the balance in the Exchequer is often insufficient
to meet requirements, and it is then that money is borrowed from the
Bank of England on deficiency bills. Of course the Bank also advances
to the Government for other purposes, and the extent of these loans may
be seen in the statement issued by the Chancellor of the Exchequer each
week.

The next entry on the Assets side, "Other Securities," is extremely
misleading, or, at least, it embraces such a wide variety of assets as
to make the entry practically useless to all who wish to ascertain the
real position of the Bank. Included therein are (1) All the investments
of the Bank other than Government securities; (2) Loans to customers
and to the Stock Exchange, and bills of exchange discounted for
customers and for the bill brokers; (3) The book value of its various
premises, unless, of course, its head office and branches have been
paid for out of the profits of previous years, on which subject the
return does not enlighten us.

The balance sheets of some of the minor joint stock banks are
disgracefully compiled, but, with respect to this one entry, the Bank
of England return runs them very close, and it seems a pity that so
powerful a corporation does not set a better example. The Bank, because
it holds the bankers' reserves and keeps the Government accounts, is
often able to corner the outside market; therefore the least it can do
is to issue a plain statement, which will enable the public to see the
exact situation created by the unique position it occupies.

The return is badly worded, and essential information is certainly
withheld, while distinctness is not by any means one of its good
points, for nobody, unless he studied the statement with the greatest
care, could possibly divine the meaning of some of its quaint,
old-world phraseology. But, as we all know, "great men and great things
are never in a 'urry"; and the Bank of England, which is great in the
best sense of the word, like the Government whose account it keeps,
has never been known to anticipate a new development. A pedigree
person always swears by the old. But the time has surely arrived when
public opinion should compel the directors to issue a fuller and less
ambiguous weekly statement. The present form was no doubt a model of
lucidity in 1844; but it is woefully behind the times in 1902.

The last two entries on the Assets side form the Bank's reserve
of legal tender. Strictly speaking, a bank's cash reserve is that
sum which it has set aside to meet possible demands of an abnormal
character, and as the Bank of England's till-money is included in the
two entries in question, the total, £23,616,229, cannot be considered a
true reserve, as a certain deduction has first to be made therefrom to
provide for the ordinary demands made upon its resources in the usual
course of business. Further, the Bank, because it is the bankers' bank,
is peculiarly exposed to large drains of specie and notes. It follows,
therefore, that to ascertain its true reserve, a very large amount
would have to be deducted from the sum in question. A true reserve
is a sum set apart for a particular purpose, of which no portion is
used in the business it is intended to guarantee. It is a fund apart.
Consequently, a banker's real reserve is obtained by deducting from
his legal tender in hand the sum he requires for the conduct of his
business. The Bank of England, however, needs more till-money than an
ordinary banking institution.

Glancing at the liability side of the statement, we see that the first
two entries represent working capital. In other words, £18,369,736 is
a fixed sum, against which it is not necessary to hold one penny in
reserve, because no withdrawals can be made therefrom during a time of
bad credit. Such an immense amount of working capital makes the Bank
of England more independent of its depositors than is the ordinary
joint stock bank, and, therefore, its strength as a banking company is
increased appreciably thereby, for the weakness of our banking system
is due entirely to a fear of possible sudden demands on the part of
depositors.

Still keeping on the same side, the last three entries give us the
Bank's liabilities to the Government and to the public; and as large
demands upon this sum of £52,910,089 may be made at any moment, a sum
of notes and coin is held in the Banking Department to meet them. This
sum, the Bank's so-called reserve, amounts, we know, to £23,616,229,
and we next have to ascertain the ratio per cent. it bears to the
liabilities in question. The following sum will supply the answer:

(£23,616,229 × 100) / (£52,910,089) = £44·6%

The Bank, then, on 1st October last, held £44·6 in notes and specie in
the Banking Department to meet each £100 it owed to its customers. Yet
we say "as safe as the Bank of England," when, as a matter of fact,
the Bank could not pay its debts on demand; and, paradoxical as it may
seem, so the Bank _is_ safe, because its credit is so good that no man
in England would ever dream of questioning its stability, for, if he
did, he would only be laughed at for his pains. Again, comparatively
speaking, the Bank of England is certainly safer than its rivals, and
when we consider, in so far as its customers are concerned, the huge
amount of its capital and reserve, it is evident that it is by far the
safest bank in the land for depositors, as the larger the capital of a
bank the greater is the guarantee of the customer against loss.

We have seen that the notes and coin in the Banking Department work out
at a ratio per cent. of 44·6 to deposits; but as notes are not legal
tender by the Bank of England, its creditors can refuse to accept them
in discharge of a debt. This £21,391,145 of notes might, however, have
been exchanged for gold with the Issue Department at any moment, so
that the Bank could have paid off 44·6 per cent. of its liabilities on
the day in question--a huge proportion.

It may be objected that, as a certain portion of its gold is held in
bars, which would have to be sent to the Mint for coinage, the Bank
could not discharge its debts quite so rapidly, and the contention
would be perfectly true. But, assuming this exchange were made,
£12,226,185 in gold would remain in the Issue Department to meet
£30,401,185 of notes in circulation. The Bank, of course, could not
then pay one half of its notes were they presented; but such a demand
is almost outside the bounds of probability. Still, it is one of those
extremely remote possibilities which no prudent Board of Directors can
afford to forget; and we may be quite sure that this fact has not been
overlooked by the Bank, which can always protect its gold by raising
its discount rate.

In the next chapter another view will be taken of the Bank of England's
weekly balance sheet.




CHAPTER IV.

The Issue and Banking Departments Combined.


In the preceding chapter the Issue and Banking Departments of the Bank
of England have been discussed separately. Strictly speaking they can,
of course, only be so treated, as each division stands alone; yet the
notes in the Banking Department undoubtedly form a connecting link
between the two divisions, seeing that they make the one department
by far the largest single creditor of the other. Therefore it is
intended in this chapter to discuss the return as a whole, to place
the totals in the Issue Department back in the Banking Department, and
to ascertain the Bank's exact state of preparedness to meet all its
liabilities. The following table will enable us to do this:

ISSUE AND BANKING DEPARTMENTS.

                             £       |                                 £
  Capital                14,553,000  |Specie and Bullion         35,842,414
  Rest or Reserve Fund    3,816,736  |Government Debt            11,015,100
  Notes in Circulation   30,401,185  |Other Securities            7,159,900
  Public Deposits        10,025,973  |Government Securities      15,826,080
  Other Deposits         42,695,526  |Loans, Bills Discounted,
  Seven-Day Bills           188,590  |  Securities, etc.         31,837,516
                        -----------  |                          -----------
                       £101,681,010  |                         £101,681,010
                        ===========  |                          ===========

_1st October, 1902._

  ============+============+=======+============+
              | Ratio % of |       |            |
  Ratio % of  |Investments |Total  |Ratio % of  |
  Specie and  |    and     |Liquid |Capital to  |
  Bullion to  |Government  |Assets.|Liabilities.|
  Liabilities.|  Debt to   |       |            |
              |Liabilities.|       |            |
  ------------+------------+-------+------------+
              |            |       |            |
     43·02    |    40·81   | 83·83 |    17·46   |
              |            |       |            |
  ============+============+=======+============+

  ============+========+=============+
              |        | Ratio % of  |
  Ratio % of  | Total  |   Loans,    |
    Rest to   |Working |Bills, etc., |
  Liabilities.|Capital.|    to       |
              |        |Liabilities. |
              |        |             |
  ------------+--------+-------------+
              |        |             |
      4·58    |  22·04 |    38·21    |
              |        |             |
  ============+========+=============+


It may be urged that as the gold and securities in the Issue Department
are mortgaged to the holders of Bank of England notes, they cannot
be treated as ordinary assets, and that is true enough; but when
we remember that upon the day in question the Banking Department
could have exchanged notes to the value of £21,000,000 for gold, the
objection loses much of its force.

However, assuming the Banking Department made the exchange, then specie
to the extent of over £12,000,000 and the second and third items on
the right-hand side of the balance sheet would be mortgaged to the
holders of the notes in circulation, and the Bank, were it in need,
could legally neither sell the securities nor apply the £12,000,000 in
question to the liquidation of any other debt.

But, practically, there is small likelihood of the Bank of England
being drained of specie by its notes, which have always been accepted
without demur, even during the most troublous years of its history;
and, while remembering that the notes in circulation are secured in
the manner aforesaid, we may safely consider the Bank's state of
preparedness to meet its total public indebtedness from the point of
view that its liquid assets would be more than sufficient to discharge
all probable demands made by both holders of notes and depositors.

On the 1st October last the Bank owed on its Notes in Circulation,
Public and Other Deposits, and Bills, the huge sum of £83,311,274,
which we will call its "Liabilities to the Public." Against this it
held £35,842,414 in specie and bullion, which, a glance at the table
shows, works out at a ratio per cent. of 43·02. The Bank had, then,
£43·02 of the precious metals in hand to meet each £100 it owed to its
customers. There is not another bank in the kingdom able to publish a
balance sheet showing such a splendid proportion of cash in hand to
liabilities--but we must also remember that there is not another bank
in the country whose responsibilities are so great and so multifarious.

In the previous chapter it was shown that the Banking Department
possessed £44·6 in notes and coin to meet each £100 of the public
liabilities included therein, and, moreover, this would be the ratio
given by the critics; but we now see that, when the two departments
are united, the ratio only works out at £43·02. Strictly speaking,
the larger ratio is correct; yet the smaller gives a much truer idea
of the Bank's ability to pay off its creditors in cash on demand.
Further, as the Bank cannot compel its customers to accept its own
notes in discharge of a debt, the ratio £43·02 certainly gives one a
more accurate impression of the Bank's position in relation to all its
creditors.

The Government Debt, Other Securities, and Government Securities amount
to £34,001,080, which works out at a ratio per cent. to liabilities of
£40·81, making the ratio of total liquid assets £83·83. A debt owing
by the British Government is rightly included with the liquid assets
of the Bank, for when the credit of the Government ebbs our banking
companies, which hold huge amounts of Consols, will no longer be
solvent institutions; but no reasonable man imagines that an edifice
which has been centuries in building, and which is still far from being
either complete or perfect, will "go under" in a day, though all know
that it cannot last for ever in its present form. We, however, only
live sixty years or so, and therefore each generation of business men
considers what will last out its time, and troubles itself but little
about what the state of commerce will be fifty years later, as though
dimly conscious that, in the end, man will have to go back to the land.

The Bank, we see, possesses £83·83 in cash and the very best securities
to meet each £100 it owes to the public. Such figures cannot fail to
impress one, for they prove indisputably that, on its merits, the
Bank of England is by far the strongest banking company in the three
kingdoms. They should not, however, blind our eyes to the fact that the
Bank is a credit institution, and that were its creditors to go for
gold in a body it would inevitably "smash," for, as we can see from the
figures in the first column of the table on page 49, it never keeps a
supply of the precious metals equal to its liabilities on demand. But,
for all that, the Bank is splendidly prepared to meet every probable
demand; and one cannot ask more of its directors.

It would be easy enough to write an indictment against the Bank,
proving that its policy is all wrong, that it could not discharge its
obligations under certain given conditions, and that, therefore, it is
a menace to the solvency of the country. But such deductions, which
have already been made by more than one critic, are crass nonsense,
and only testify to the critics' ignorance of the subject. We know
that the Bank's system is not by any means a perfect one, but, surely,
the person who advertises an infallible financial system is either a
great rogue or a great simpleton; for why is he not himself rich beyond
desire?

The Bank of England, it is admitted, cannot meet its liabilities on
demand, and most people would think that its directors had gone mad if
they prepared to, while the stockholders would certainly threaten to
turn out those directors who proposed a policy which would reduce the
value of their stock considerably below parity.

The question seems to be: Is the Bank of England sufficiently prepared
to meet all likely withdrawals of gold by its customers and by the
holders of its notes?

The two columns, which give us the amount of the Bank's liquid assets,
tell us plainly enough that the Bank of England was well prepared on
the 1st October. We can see that it held a good supply of coin and
bullion, and, secondly, a valuable list of convertible securities; but
as the securities are only convertible so long as the Bank, which holds
the reserves of cash of all the banks in the United Kingdom, is in a
position to meet all probable demands upon its store of gold, it is
evident that the first ratio is of paramount importance.

The Bank of England, which possesses the only large store of the
precious metals in this country, has to meet both the home and foreign
demands for gold. It follows, therefore, that its ratio per cent.
of Reserve to Liabilities is eagerly scrutinised each week on the
publication of the return, because it indicates whether or not loanable
capital is likely to be dear or cheap. The means at its disposal for
maintaining an adequate supply in reserve will be discussed later on.

Should the said ratio fall below, say, forty per cent., then it
is prudent to inquire the reason; and should it recede to, say,
thirty-three or thirty-four per cent., then there may be cause even for
apprehension; but so long as the Bank of England keeps a fair ratio
of reserve to its public indebtedness, there is no cause for alarm:
though a bank which holds the national reserve must always be extremely
cautious, even when credit is good and there is not a breath of
suspicion in the air, for the proverbial little cloud gathers strength
with incredible speed when once it does appear.

Undoubtedly our banking system is exposed to the gravest dangers, but
as it brings us cheap money we accept the risks; and unless a critic
can produce a workable scheme which will eliminate the hazard and
retain the blessing of cheap loanable capital, he had better by far
confine his attention to those safeguards that reduce the risks of our
present system, which _is_ workable, to a minimum. Provided the Bank of
England keeps an adequate reserve in the Banking Department, we have at
least the satisfaction of knowing that all that can reasonably be done
to ensure safety has been done, and that those risks, which a credit
bank cannot avoid under any system, have at least been insured against
under our own.

No doubt the Bank's large working capital of over £17,500,000 has
contributed very considerably to its ascendancy, and helped it,
especially since 1844, to more than hold its own against all comers;
for despite the fact that we occasionally hear sneers--no doubt
prompted by jealousy--at its so-styled omnipotence, an examination of
its return soon convinces the sceptical that it is still the largest
and safest bank in England. Further, it has occupied this enviable
position for over two hundred years.

The ratio per cent. of Advances (loans, bills discounted, securities,
&c.) to Liabilities is only 38·21--a proportion, especially when it
is remembered that an unknown amount of investments is included
therewith, which clearly informs us that the Bank is fully alive to the
responsibilities of its unique position, and that its directors, while
they are no doubt anxious to make as much net profit as possible for
the proprietors, have not lost sight of the fact that they also have
duties to perform towards the public.

But it must not be thought that the directors discharge their duties
towards the public so well from philanthropic motives. Even from a
selfish standpoint it pays them to keep the Bank thoroughly prepared,
as, should they allow the reserve to sink too low, an anxious period
would be certain to follow, when additional profits, made by trading
with too large a proportion of the deposits, would speedily be swept
away by the expense incurred by borrowing back at high rates in order
to strengthen the cash in hand. For a little while the interest upon
the increased loans would swell the profits, but directly the foreign
exchanges moved against this country, and gold began to flow abroad,
even an inexperienced director would realise the folly of risking a
panic for the sake of seeing the dividends rise, and he would not make
such a doubtful experiment a second time.

Perhaps, before bringing this chapter to a close, it may be interesting
to compare the total indebtedness of the Bank of England to the public
and its stockholders with that of Lloyds and the National Provincial
Bank of England to their customers and shareholders. The following
table will supply the figures:--

  ========================================================
           Name of Bank.              | Total Liabilities.
  ------------------------------------+-------------------
                                      |     £
  Bank of England                     | 101,681,010
  Lloyds                              | 58,411,041[A]
  National Provincial Bank of England | 56,444,126[A]
  ------------------------------------+-------------------
  [Footnote A: Balance Sheet dated 31st December, 1901.]
  ========================================================

We can now see how much larger are the working resources of the Bank
of England than those of either of the other above-mentioned banking
institutions, though, as the joint stock banks keep their reserves of
cash with the Bank of England, the comparison loses a little of its
force. Still, the preponderance of the Bank of England is most marked,
a fact one is not, perhaps, so apt to realise when the Issue and
Banking Departments are considered apart.




CHAPTER V.

The Store in the Issue Department.


We next have to consider the amount of gold coin and bullion in the
Issue Department--to wit, £33,617,330, and we must remember that this
accumulation is the national store, that the cash reserves of all the
banks in England, Scotland, and Ireland are dependent thereupon, and
that, consequently, the solvency of the nation is decided thereby.

The indebtedness of the English, Scotch, and Irish Banks to the public
at December, 1901, as shown by their balance sheets, upon current
accounts, deposit receipts, and notes in circulation, amounted to
nearly £910,000,000. The liabilities of the Bank of England and of
those private bankers who publish balance sheets are included in this
huge total.

This £910,000,000 may be called the "floating capital" of the
country. It is deposited or left with the banks, who invest a certain
proportion of it in securities, in short loans to the bill brokers
and stockbrokers, in making advances and loans to their customers,
and in discounting bills for them; and, as the said millions are left
at either call or short notice, the banks also have to maintain a
sufficient supply of legal tender to meet all probable demands upon
this immense debt. It is with this "floating capital" that the present
chapter is principally concerned.

Stored in their strong rooms the banks keep sufficient legal tender
(Bank of England notes and specie) with which to conduct their
business. The sum thus held may be called their "till money"; and
it probably would not exceed five per cent. of the £910,000,000 in
question--viz.: £45,500,000. A large part of this till money is,
however, held in Bank of England notes, which are warrants for gold
upon the store in the Issue Department, but as creditors cannot refuse
the notes they are quite as valuable to a banker as gold. All a banker
has to consider is whether he has a sufficient supply of legal tender
to discharge his public indebtedness; and if he have, he need take no
thought for the morrow.

Deducting £45,500,000 from £910,000,000, we get £864,500,000. Though
this is an accumulation of credit in the books of the banks rather
than of cash, their customers can demand the equivalent from them in
legal tender; yet we see that, were the banks drained of £45,500,000,
they would then be entirely dependent upon their reserves at the Bank
of England.

The reserves are included in Other Deposits, £42,695,526; and seeing
the magnitude of the amount it seems a pity that the Bank of England
does not tell us each week what portion of this total belongs to the
other banks. Further, the Bank of England employs these balances in
its own business; and, though it generally maintains a very large
ratio per cent. of reserve to liabilities, the fact remains that a
certain proportion of the cash reserves of our banks is lent out to
the public--a somewhat startling position at first sight. The banks
accumulate a reserve against those dangers from which their business
is never free, and the Bank of England advances some of it to its own
customers! Apparently, what could be more absurd? But in finance things
are so often not what they seem.

We now come to the store of gold coin and bullion in the Issue
Department--£33,617,330. A certain proportion of this must be retained
in order to secure the convertibility of the notes of the Bank, and the
remainder may perhaps be called the national store or accumulation.
The banks of the United Kingdom are indebted, roughly speaking, to
the public to the extent of £910,000,000. But we have seen that, say,
£45,500,000 of this sum is secured by legal tender in hand, so the
unsecured portion amounts to £864,500,000. Our position, then, stands
as under:--

  Indebtedness of the Banks of
    the United Kingdom to the
    public                         £910,000,000

  _Less_ covered by legal tender
    (say)                            45,500,000
                                   ------------
                                   £864,500,000

  Gold and bullion at the Bank
    of England                      £35,800,000

As a matter of fact, we are looking on the bright side of the picture,
for seeing that a large amount in Bank notes would be held among the
£45,500,000 deducted, it follows that the store in the Issue Department
might be appreciably reduced were a considerable number of these notes
presented for payment; and then again, the indebtedness of those
private bankers who do not publish balance sheets has been omitted.
Suppose we say that the banks hold £35,500,000 in specie. This,
added to the store at the Bank, gives us £71,300,000. Then our banks
owe £910,000,000; but there is only £71,000,000 of specie in their
possession with which to pay their huge debt. On the other hand, many
of the banks do not hold nearly five per cent. of their liabilities
to the public in legal tender on their premises; and, were the truth
known, it is more than probable that in some instances three-and-a-half
to four-and-a-half per cent. would be nearer the mark.

England, after all, is only a gigantic workshop, and so long as her
shops are busy there is no danger. But have those people who live on
incomes invested solely in British securities ever reflected that, were
there no work for her shops, this system of credit would collapse like
a castle of cards, when their incomes would be gone? Our solvency as
a nation depends absolutely upon the skill and ability displayed by
British manufacturers, and upon the muscles and intelligence of their
workmen. Given a high standard of efficiency and adaptability on the
part of our producers, then trade flows to this country, and by trade
alone can we support our credit and pay our debts. Small wonder, then,
that thoughtful people are becoming alarmed at the apotheosis of Games
in this country, and at the large number of idlers who do not take a
part in production, but are dependent upon the interest received from
investments, which can only be productive so long as our commerce is
flourishing.

The capital of this country has been computed by a competent authority
at about £10,500,000,000, but doubtless these figures are very wide of
the mark. Still, the amount of fixed capital invested in the country
must be immense. By "fixed" capital, as distinguished from the floating
or loanable capital deposited with the banks and kindred institutions,
those investments of a more permanent character are implied. A
depositor can demand his money back from his banker, but bank shares
he would have to sell on the Stock Exchange--therefore the one is
"floating" and the other "fixed" capital. It is the same with Consols,
railway shares, and with the shares of all companies in which there is
a market. When there is not a market, then the capital is fixed indeed;
and there would not even be a market for Consols were the Bank of
England drained of its gold. Moreover, during normal times the demand
for loanable capital at the banks will help to determine the price
an investor will receive should he desire to sell any of his fixed
investments.

It consequently amounts to this: The fixed capital of the country
cannot be converted or sold unless the banks maintain large cash
reserves; so we may truthfully assert that about £10,000,000,000 of
capital is erected on a basis of about £71,000,000 of cash. This cash,
in its turn, can only be kept in the country while our workshops are
busy; therefore it at once becomes apparent that the national aim
should be to increase our trade, for the yield, and consequently the
value, of British securities is bound to either increase or diminish
in proportion as the trade of the country is either flourishing or the
reverse. Even the Government can only meet the interest on Consols
while the people are in a position to pay their taxes.

Such a statement may come as a shock to those persons who are
accustomed to draw their dividends each half-year or year, and to
imagine that unless the world came to an end these dividends could
not cease; but they would cease were this country to fall hopelessly
behind in the race for trade. This is not the old Socialist maxim that
"Labour supports the world" put into a new print dress. It is evident
that the fixed capital of this country, as represented by stocks and
shares, would be mere waste paper unless the banks held sufficient
gold to ensure a market for them: and as this gold cannot be kept in
the country unless our workshops are able to compete successfully with
those of other nations, it follows that the position of those persons
who draw incomes from British securities is entirely dependent upon
the brains and abilities of the men who direct our industries. How
important, then, that the very best talent the nation possesses should
be used in trade; and what folly it is on the part of those so-called
"superior" persons to sneer at the trader--at him who, without doubt,
enables them to draw their incomes regularly!

There was a time when capital, broadly speaking, could only be obtained
in London; but since then population has increased all the world over,
and as capital is only the savings of labour, it naturally follows that
it can now be obtained abroad, and that London is less necessary to the
foreign borrower; and, as the world fills up, it must surely become
less and less necessary. Yet our gilded youth affects to despise trade.
This is somewhat absurd, when it is trade that enables him to live in
idleness; and British pride, unless it recognises this fact, may have a
bad fall.

The banks of the United Kingdom, roughly speaking, are indebted to the
public to the extent of £910,000,000. They only keep till-money in
their safes, and are dependent upon the store in the Issue Department
of the Bank of England for their reserves of cash. In other words, this
£33,000,000 of specie is the foundation stone upon which £910,000,000
of credit rests. It has already been shown in what relation the fixed
capital of the country stands to this fund.

The smaller of the provincial banking companies keep their cash
reserves with their London agents, who also place their reserves with
the Bank of England. Consequently, as the agents include the reserves
of these banks with their own deposits, they, like the Bank of England
in relation to the bankers' balances, lend out a percentage of the
reserves of the smaller banks. It follows, therefore, that the bankers'
balances in the hands of the Bank are smaller than would be the case
if each bank kept its reserve with it. The London agents are dependent
upon the Bank, and the smaller banks upon the agents.

As the store in the Issue Department is the only large collection of
specie and bullion in the three kingdoms, and as the amount therein
is always extremely small when compared with the huge liabilities
which, under certain conditions, it might be asked to liquidate, any
considerable depletion of this store makes the owners of large bank
balances nervous; for if the Bank of England cannot pay the bankers,
then their bankers will not be able to pay them.

Again, the liabilities of the banks are so immense in comparison
with their reserves that a very small diminution of the fund in the
Issue Department makes owners of capital anxious, whilst a serious
drain would probably create a panic; and unless means were devised to
allay the panic, it might develop into a revolution; for we are very
commercial in these days, and are beginning to realise that mere glory
may be bought too dearly. Commercialism, however, is not exactly a
fascinating virtue.

We are constantly being told that the money market is an extremely
sensitive organisation. And no wonder! The banks owe hundreds of
millions on demand and short notice. Considerably over eighty per cent.
of these millions is invested and lent, and as the banks' reserves of
gold are small, every sudden demand for large supplies of the precious
metals is liable to disorganise the market; and the Bank, which holds
the final reserve, is therefore compelled to raise its rate of discount
in order to protect the bullion in its Issue Department.

But for this very reason capital may generally be borrowed more cheaply
in London than elsewhere; and though cash is perhaps dangerously
economised, credit is proportionately the more easily obtainable, and
the price of a loan is cheaper than would be the case were the banks to
maintain a higher ratio of cash to liabilities. They would then have
less to lend, and in times when trade was brisk demand would drive up
the rate of interest to higher figures than those which prevail under
our present system, and reduce the profits of borrowers. The average
rate, too, would be greater.

The dangers of our system are very apparent, but so are its advantages;
and though we consider it pays us to take the risks, it is evident that
we cannot afford to neglect the necessary precautions.




CHAPTER VI.

Weekly Differences in the Return.


It were better, before proceeding further, to give a copy of the Bank
Return as it appears in the daily papers each Friday, when comparisons
are made with the figures of the preceding week, and the various
differences carried into distinctive columns. That for the week ended
Wednesday, 1st October, 1902, has been selected, in order that the
figures may be the same throughout this volume. The statement is given
below:

Issue Department.

  =========================================================================
    2 Oct.,  |                 |  24 Sept. |  1 Oct.,  |Increase.|Decrease.
     1901.   |                 |   1902.   |   1902.   |         |
  -----------+-----------------+-----------+-----------+---------+---------
       £     |        £        |     £     |     £     |   £     |   £
   36,080,595| Gold and Bullion| 35,109,950| 33,617,330|  ...    |1,492,620
   53,855,595| Notes Issued    | 53,284,950| 51,792,330|  ...    |1,492,620
   30,546,875| Circulation     | 29,198,845| 30,401,185|1,202,340|
  =========================================================================


Banking Department.

 ==========================================================================
 2 Oct.,  |                     | 24 Sept.,| 1 Oct.,  |Increase. |Decrease.
  1901.   |                     |  1902.   |  1902.   |          |
 ---------+---------------------+----------+----------+----------+---------
    £     |    Liabilities.     |    £     |    £     |    £     |   £
          |                     |          |          |          |
 3,790,617|Rest                 | 3,804,611| 3,816,736|    12,125|  ...
10,874,581|Public Deposits      | 8,301,490|10,025,973| 1,724,483|  ...
41,204,129|Other Deposits       |40,373,382|42,695,526| 2,322,144|  ...
   143,965|Seven-Day Bills      |   192,886|   188,590|          |     4,296
 ---------+---------------------+----------+----------+          |
    £     |      Assets.        |    £     |    £     |Decrease. |Increase.
          |                     |          |          |          |
 8,022,103|Government Securities|14,594,260|15,826,080|   ...    | 1,231,820
 7,158,440|Other Securities     |26,302,606|31,837,516|   ...    | 5,534,910
 3,308,720|Notes                |24,086,105|21,391,145| 2,694,960|
 2,077,029|Gold and Silver      | 2,242,398|2,225,084 |    17,314|
          |                     |          |          +----------+----------
          |                     |          |          |£6,771,026|£6,771,026
   48⅝%   |Ratio                |   53·87% |  44·6%   |
      3%  |Bank Rate            |     3%   |    4%    |
 ===========================================================================

Why, it may be asked, is so much importance attached to this return,
and why do the critics, each week, endeavour to state precisely
how much the "market" has borrowed from, or repaid to, the Bank,
and to explain the cause of the various accretions and diminutions
in the different assets and liabilities? With regard to the latter
attempt, each critic, it is said, is quite convinced that he alone
understands the true inwardness of the various movements which result
in the increases and decreases recorded in our table; but it is just
whispered that those persons at the Bank of England who _know_ the
cause laugh at their deductions.

The return is of the greatest moment to the public, for the simple
reason that it shows the ratio per cent. of the Bank's reserve of notes
and cash in hand to its liabilities, and, also, the amount of coin and
bullion in the Issue Department. The Bank holds the final reserve; and
if demand is brisk and the other bankers have advanced largely to the
outside market, the bill brokers are driven to the Bank. As the banking
companies have advanced all their spare capital, demand can only be
supplied from the reserve at the Bank of England; and the Bank, which
must protect its gold, checks demand by charging high rates to all who
borrow.

The return, then, tells us whether loanable capital is likely to be
cheap or dear. If the ratio to liabilities be small, and the store of
gold diminishing, we know that demand has reached the Bank, and that
money will be dear. When money is dear, Consols and other so-called
gilt-edged securities are almost certain to fall in value. If it
become really scarce, then the banks, which lend huge sums on the
Stock Exchange, charge the brokers enhanced rates, and "carrying over"
becomes difficult. Numerous speculative accounts have to be closed, and
securities, consequently, fall in price.

Now, a glance at the return of 1st October, 1902, shows that the ratio
on that date is 44·6 per cent., and the Bank's discount rate four per
cent. The bullion in the Issue Department decreased £1,492,620, and
the Bank, in order to arrest this drain, raised the rate from three
to four per cent. The political unrest in France, which at first
threatened to disturb the London money market, and the tightness
of money in New York, were, undoubtedly, two factors which largely
influenced the decision of the directors, who, no doubt, also took into
their consideration the fact that the autumn demand for currency might
further reduce their reserve. Noticing that Consols were at 93⅛,
and believing that the stringency was only temporary, one might feel
disposed to buy, trusting that cheaper money during the earlier part of
the new year would drive them up to 96 or so.

The weekly return of the Bank of England, then, is the barometer which
tells us whether loanable capital is either scarce or abundant,
dear or cheap; and, when read with the Board of Trade returns
and the foreign exchanges, it enables us to guess, with more or
less _uncertainty_, but still intelligently, and with a degree of
probability, whether or not money is likely to be in future demand. The
Railway and Bankers' Clearing House returns, too, indicate the course
of trade, and are of more than academic interest. It is, however,
always wise to remember that finance is not an exact science, for if it
were the theorists would be fabulously rich; and we know that they are
generally so hard up as to be compelled to write books and financial
articles for a living.

Now we can see why the Bank of England's weekly balance sheet is keenly
interesting to every person who possesses capital either to lend or to
invest, to dealers in bills and securities, and to every speculator
on the Stock Exchange, as a strong or a weak return may make all the
difference to the rates charged on "contango" day. Borrowers and
lenders are equally concerned, for the rate of interest does not depend
upon the caprice of any individual or of any bank, but is solely the
outcome or result of demand and supply; and demand, when the banks
have exhausted their supplies of spare capital, then centres itself
fiercely upon the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street simply because she
holds the final reserve of cash, and for no other reason whatsoever.

Reverting to our statement, we find that the increases and decreases of
the various totals balance each other; and if the differences agree,
then the assets and liabilities, on adding the Bank's capital of
£14,553,000 to the latter, must also balance each other, for the simple
reason that the Bank keeps its books by double entry. The best system
of bookkeeping which can possibly be adopted is the simplest system,
because the very fact of accounts being complex and involved is sure
to result in a multiplicity of mistakes, which prove that the system
is faulty. In double entry there must be a debit for every credit; so
every sum debited to one account in the books of the Bank of England is
credited to another or to others; and as the assets and liabilities in
the statement tally, therefore the balances in the last two columns,
which are the result of multitudinous debits and credits made during
the week, must agree also. But how is it possible for an outsider
to follow these internal movements? He simply cannot. Consequently
his deductions made from the differences shown week by week are
sometimes very wide of the mark, and, for his own reputation's sake,
it would be wiser if he were to confine his remarks principally to the
all-important questions of the ratio in the Banking Department and the
bullion in the Issue Department.

For instance, simply with the differences in question to go upon, it
may be said that the return shows that the market has borrowed largely
from the Bank, "Other Securities" being up over £5,000,000. Part of
this amount increased "Other Deposits," and a transfer was also made
to "Public Deposits" in order to pay the Government for £2,000,000 of
Treasury bills, while the accretion to "Government Securities" seems to
indicate that the Government borrowed a certain sum from the Bank on
Ways and Means, and that loans were made to the market on this class of
security.

In London the "loan account" system is greatly in evidence among the
banks. That is to say, when a customer is granted a loan for, say,
£10,000, his current account is credited £10,000, and a loan account,
opened in his name, is debited £10,000. The interest is calculated
upon the loan account, and the advantage resulting to the banks is too
evident to call for explanation in these pages.

When loans are made by the Bank of England, accounts which increase
"Other Securities" are debited, and other accounts, which increase
"Other Deposits" are credited--if the loans are made to the public.
Should the loans be made to the Government, "Public Deposits" and
"Government Securities" also increase proportionately from the same
cause. The Bank, because it keeps the bankers' accounts, occupies a
peculiar position in relation to these entries, and that position will
be discussed in a later chapter.

The notes in the Banking Department have decreased £2,694,960 and the
specie £17,314, so, if we add these two sums together, the total,
£2,712,274, represents the diminution in the reserve. A glance at the
Bank's liabilities shows us that they have increased appreciably, and
as the reserve has shrunk considerably, it follows that the ratio is
very much smaller than that of the previous week. Indeed, the reserve
had not fallen so low since May; and the monetary outlook being
uncertain, the directors, as a precautionary measure, raised the rate
of discount.

Next, suppose that we wish to ascertain the amount of cash which has
been withdrawn from the Bank to meet the demand within the country. The
bullion in the Issue Department is £1,492,620 down, and the coin in the
Banking Department £17,314; so the Bank has lost £1,509,934 in coin
and bullion. But £730,000 was exported during the week; therefore, if
we deduct £730,000 from £1,509,934, the difference, £779,934, is the
amount that is gone into home circulation.

But, it may be asked, how can one ascertain the amounts of the exports
and imports of the precious metals? Late in the afternoon of each day
the Bank exhibits a statement on its walls giving this information,
and it was from these placards that it was ascertained that the sum in
question had been sent abroad. Hence it is possible to learn how much
cash was withdrawn from the Bank for home requirements during the week,
or, better, the amount of the efflux on the day of the publication of
the return.

But, as has already been explained, these deductions are not always
reliable.




CHAPTER VII.

The Bank of England as Agent of the Mint.


In theory any person can take gold bullion to the Mint, which, under
the Coinage Act, is compelled to give him in exchange sovereigns
containing an equal quantity of gold to that left; but nobody ever
does, and practically the Bank of England acts as the Mint's agent.
By the Bank Act he receives £3 17s. 9d. per ounce, instead of £3 17s.
10½d., the full Mint price, the deduction of 1½d. being about
equal to the loss of interest incurred, for the Mint does not bargain
to pay out coin immediately on delivery of bullion.

All the bankers in the United Kingdom, we know, obtain their supplies
of cash from the Issue Department of the Bank of England, which, as a
natural consequence, supplies the currency requirements of the nation.
Possessing the only large store of bullion, it can, so to speak, feel
the pulse of the whole trading community; and, directly a demand
sets in for specie, it sends bullion to the Mint for conversion into
coin. This it can do without any loss of interest whatever, for, of
course, the bullion is lying idle in the Issue Department. A bank
which keeps the Government accounts, and stands in this relation to
the other bankers, must of necessity become the agent of the Mint,
which, even in its output of silver and bronze coins, relies absolutely
upon information received from the Bank of England. The Bank, in fact,
supplies both the London and country bankers with these token coins.

As an illustration of this one of those little social amenities which
take place between bankers and their clients about Christmas time may
be mentioned. Naturally I am not alluding to the higgling occasioned by
the increase of advances and bills discounted to meet a growing demand
at this period of the year. But many persons, just before the festive
season sets in, like to obtain supplies of bright new silver coins
with which to anoint the palms of their humbler fellow-subjects, whose
manners about that time become aggressively pleasant and ingratiating.
These coins they get from their bankers, who receive them from the
Bank of England and its branches, either directly or through their
agents. As soon as the bankers run short of silver coins, they apply to
the Bank, which, being in close touch with every source of demand, is
able to guide the Mint on a question of supply.

The Bank of England does not possess a legal monopoly, but occupies
this position solely because it holds the final reserve of cash. If
the Government and all the bankers keep accounts with the Bank of
England, then the Bank must act as the agent of the Mint so long as
this state of affairs continues, because its Issue Department has to
meet all demands for cash made upon it by the Bank's customers and
the holders of its notes; and as these customers, either directly or
indirectly, include every large dealer in gold in the land, it supplies
the currency as a matter of course. Dealers do not send their bullion
to the Mint, because it is more convenient to sell it outright to
the Bank, which settles with them immediately, thereby removing all
uncertainty as to the length of time coinage will occupy.

It follows, therefore, that the Bank of England has to meet all demands
for gold, whether for home or foreign requirement; but it is when gold
is leaving the country in large quantities that drastic measures have
to be taken in order to stop the depletion of the Bank's reserve of the
precious metals, for some of the home drains are only of a temporary
nature, and unless capital be greatly in demand at the time they do not
affect the rate of interest, as the money flows back to the Bank after
a short interval.

The Bank of England on 5th January, 5th April, 5th July, and 5th
October pays the quarterly dividends on the National Debt. The
Government, which at the present time has to provide over £6,000,000
each quarter, has a huge sum standing to its credit before one of these
payments matures, and the sudden release of so much capital often
causes the rate of discount to fall, especially during those years when
trade is good, and the demand for loanable capital consequently brisk.
If times are dull, then the rate will not ascend when the Government is
taking money off the market, as the demand upon the reduced resources
of the banks will not be sufficiently keen to drive a large number of
borrowers to the Bank of England.

We have an illustration of this in the fact that from February, 1894,
to September, 1896, trade was so inactive, and demand therefore so
small, that the Bank rate stood at two per cent. during the whole
period. In other words, we had two and a half years with the Bank rate
at two per cent. With trade bad and money cheap, speculation soon
became rampant. The gilt-edged variety of securities yielded less,
because trade was less productive, and consequently capital, instead
of being kept idle in the banks, was transferred to the better class
securities, which returned less to the investor in proportion as
increased demand forced up prices. With incomes reduced and balances
lying idle at the banks, the public developed a speculative mania, and
one result was the Stock Exchange boom of 1895, for investment business
and speculation always increase when trade is bad. Bad times, in fact,
at first add to the business of the House.

Traders keep large balances with the banks for the same reason that the
banks themselves have huge sums standing to their credit in the books
of the Bank of England, because they are bound to accumulate credit in
order to meet their engagements, and, also, to maintain a surplus in
case of accidents, such as bad debts and the inability of customers to
pay their debts immediately on maturity. When trade slackens and prices
fall, producers reduce their output, and the result is an accumulation
of credit in the books of the banks. Moreover, a certain proportion of
these balances is not then required to finance and guarantee commercial
undertakings. Hence the movement to which attention has already been
drawn.

But the holders of gilt-edged securities require some inducement in
order to persuade them to sell; and this is forthcoming in the shape
of accretions to the capital value of their stocks and shares as a
result of the increased demand. But the floating capital of the country
is not decreased by this exchange. It is left at precisely the same
figures. The buyers draw cheques upon their bankers, and the sellers
pay the same cheques to their own credit; consequently, the floating
capital in the hands of the banks is always about the same, be the
times good or bad, so long as speculation or investment is confined to
British securities. When, however, foreign securities are purchased,
gold sometimes has to be sent out of the country to help pay for
them; and it is then that the situation may cause apprehension--for
capital is leaving the country. Should the drain prove serious, the
Bank would have to raise its rate; and were it to prove continuous,
notwithstanding an abnormally high Bank rate, we might have a crisis.

Returning to the dividends on the funds, "Public Deposits" are
increased before the above-mentioned dates, and when this money is
released, the result is a large addition to "Other Deposits," because
most of the money returns to increase the bankers' balances. A small
part, however, is taken by the fund-holders in cash; so we may notice a
decrease in the Bank's reserve of notes, and, consequently, an increase
in the circulation, together, perhaps, with a fall in the bullion,
representing the small proportion withdrawn in actual cash. Should the
banks, in consequence of this increase in their deposits, be taking
bills from the brokers at cheaper rates, then "Other Securities" would
also lessen, because the bill brokers would pay off the Bank and borrow
in the cheaper market. The converse occurs when the Government is
collecting the revenue, issuing a new loan, or borrowing on Treasury
bills.

The principal currency drains will be discussed in the following
chapter.




CHAPTER VIII.

The Principal Currency Drains.


The principal currency drains occur during the holiday season and at
harvest time, more especially during the latter period, when large
amounts of cash are sent into the country to satisfy the requirements
of labour. Early in November a demand for gold arises in Scotland,
owing to the fact that rents there fall due at Martinmas (11th
November); and as the Scotch banks, by the Act of 1845, are compelled
to hold gold against notes circulated in excess of their authorised
issues, a rather heavy call is made upon the Bank of England, whose
returns then show a noticeable decrease in the reserve and bullion.
During years of active trade, and, consequently, of brisk demand for
loanable capital, these autumnal drains of gold generally force up
the rate of interest, thereby making the last quarter of the year the
dearest for borrowers.

But we are discussing internal demands only, and as, so long as
gold does not leave the country, it is merely a question of certain
sums flowing from the London money market and drifting back to it
again, this ebb and flow, which is shown by the various ups and downs
occurring from time to time in the items of the Bank return, does not
create any apprehension. Indeed, these movements occur so regularly
at certain times of the year that large borrowers often anticipate
them in order that they may tide over such periods with the minimum
of inconvenience. It is, however, otherwise when gold is leaving the
country in large quantities in order to settle the balance of our
indebtedness to other nations, for that _may_ not come back. How it is
again enticed to these shores I will endeavour to explain.

We now come to a foreign drain of gold; and this depletion of the
currency, we know, flows from the store at the Bank of England into
the hands of the foreign creditors of the nation. We export to, and
import from, other nations on a gigantic scale, and as our imports
are invariably in excess of our exports, it follows that the balance
of indebtedness on this score is always very considerably against us;
but there are other debts due to this country which from time to time
turn the balance in favour of England, and the prices quoted for bills
on the various Exchanges are the indexes which tell us whether gold is
likely to be either received from, or sent to, the great commercial
centres of the world.

Other debts due to this country have been mentioned--debts which either
tend to reduce or turn in our favour the balance we owe to foreign
countries. England has immense sums invested in foreign securities, and
the interest received therefrom acts in this direction. So, too, does
the huge sum earned by her ships in the shape of freights. Then, again,
London, still earns a large amount in the shape of commissions, even if
her position as the Clearing House of the world is now less powerful
than formerly, owing to large accumulations of capital in other centres.

On the other hand a considerable amount of foreign capital is invested
in English securities, which, when sold on the Stock Exchange, give the
foreigner a claim on our stock of gold; and though we, by similar sales
of foreign securities, can prevent this temporary drain of specie, the
enormous dealings in stocks and shares on the various Exchanges are
most keenly watched by the directors of the Bank of England, lest huge
realisations of British securities by foreigners should drain the Bank
of its gold, with which international indebtedness can alone be settled.

This brings us to the markets for bills of exchange, the prices of
which, like those of every other security, are settled by supply
and demand. If, at a given date, this country owes a foreign nation
considerably more than it has to receive, then bills on England will be
plentiful in that country; and, further, they will be cheap, because,
as debtors to England have less to remit than the aggregate of bills
on England offered for sale, the supply will be in excess of the
demand, and English bills, consequently, can be bought at a discount.
Conversely, the supply of bills in London on the foreign country will
be smaller than the sum English debtors owe therein, and in order
to save the expense of exporting gold, such bills will be eagerly
sought after, and, as the supply is smaller than the demand, buyers
soon drive them to a premium, when the rate of exchange is said to be
"unfavourable" to England.

As the balance of our international indebtedness must be cancelled by
gold, it follows that the fewer the bills offering the higher will be
the prices paid for them; and when, just towards the end, it becomes
evident that the supply is limited the bidding is often spirited; but
the premium paid cannot exceed for any considerable length of time the
expense incurred by exporting and insuring the precious metals between
any two countries, as the debtor always has the choice of despatching
gold to his foreign creditor, and, naturally, he chooses the cheaper
expedient.

The extreme fluctuations are called "gold points," and they mark the
limit to premiums procurable on bills of exchange. The table given
below will show us those points at which gold will probably either
leave or reach this country:

  ============================================================
      Exchange.    |   Mint Par.      |  Gold     |  Gold
                   |  of Exchange.    | Exports.  | Imports.
  -----------------+------------------+-----------+-----------
   London on Paris | Francs 25·22½    | 25·12½    | 25·32½
   Berlin          | Marks  20·43     | 20·34     | 20·52
   New York        | Dollars 4·87     |  4·84     |  4·90
  ============================================================

When the rates are near those given in the second column, the Bank,
if its reserve be low, begins to consider the advisability of raising
its rate of discount, for it is evident that foreign bills are at a
stiff premium, and that a demand for gold may be made upon it at any
moment. Of course the difference between the "gold points" gives
scope for speculation, and some cambists gamble in bills for the rise
or the fall just as speculators do in securities. Then, again, the
arbitrageurs largely influence prices by buying and selling securities
which are dealt in on the Stock Exchanges of more than one country.
Wars, revolutions, panics, and social upheavals also cause abnormal
fluctuations in the rates.

Let us assume that a drain is threatened from Paris. The gold in an
English sovereign is, we can see, worth about 25·22½ francs, and if
only 25·12½ is being offered on 'Change, it follows that bullion
will soon be exported to France. This the Bank wants to prevent. The
cost of transmission of bullion between the two countries is about one
half per cent.; therefore, in order to induce French capitalists to
invest in English bills of three months' date, the rate of interest
in London must be more than two per cent. in excess of that in Paris
before it will pay them to ship bullion to this country, if it be the
intention of the purchasers to withdraw their capital when the bills
mature, as the gain of two per cent. per annum for three months only
just balances the loss of 10s. per cent. incurred on specie shipments,
while no margin is left to defray possible loss through unfavourable
exchanges at the time of withdrawal. Were a purchase of six months'
bills contemplated, the difference in the two rates would only have to
exceed one per cent. before bullion could be exported profitably.

When, therefore, the Bank of England wishes to influence the foreign
exchanges, it raises its rate by one, instead of by one half as is
usual when the drain is caused by the currency requirements of this
country, or by an increased demand for loanable capital when trade
is active and the foreign exchanges favourable. One constantly hears
the question: Why has the Bank of England raised the rate by one
instead of by one half as it did last time? A glance at the foreign
exchange tables will generally supply the answer. If the expenses
for transporting and insuring bullion between any two countries are
appreciable, then were the Bank rate raised by one half (remembering
that an addition of one half per cent. per annum gives a profit of
only 2s. 6d. per cent. on a transaction in three months' bills) it is
evident that the inducement is not sufficient to attract gold over here
for that consideration alone.

By raising its rate, and, if necessary, borrowing in the market in
order to bring the market rates in touch with its own, the Bank makes
an investment in English bills a profitable transaction; and the
greater its excess over foreign rates, the stronger is the inducement
to send money to England. Of course, were this country really living on
its capital, this influx of gold would only postpone the inevitable day
of settlement, for a bankrupt does not increase his wealth by borrowing
from one person in order to pay off another. But our receipts do not
always coincide with our payments; and when, for instance, gold is sent
to the United States in the autumn to help to pay for crops imported
here, the Bank of England, by raising its rate of discount, and making
that rate a representative one, attracts gold from the Continent, in
order to tide over the interval between debts payable by us immediately
and debts due to us at a future date.

English bills being a profitable investment, the price of paper on
England at once begins to rise, and when the so-called gold point is
reached the precious metals are shipped to these shores, because the
premium on bills on England is in excess of the cost of despatching
bullion. Every rise in the rate of discount here induces foreign
holders of long-dated paper on England to retain their purchases. If
they bought three months' bills on England when the Bank's discount
rate was three, interest at the rate of three per cent. per annum was
deducted from the face value of the bill to make it equivalent to a
bill due at sight. Should the minimum rate be raised to four per cent.,
and were the holders then to remit the bills to this country to be
discounted, they would have to submit to a deduction at the rate of
four per cent. per annum. In other words, they would lose one per cent.
per annum on the transaction. Long-dated bills would therefore be held
until near maturity in order to avoid this loss.

An accretion to the Bank rate, then, not only attracts gold or capital
here, but it also induces foreign holders of long-dated bills on
England to keep them in their cases. On the other hand, a fall in the
Bank's rate of discount from, say, three to two per cent. might not
only slacken the demand for English bills, but it would also cause a
considerable number of long-dated bills on England to be sent over here
to be discounted, as the foreign holders would naturally be anxious to
secure the profit between the three per cent. per annum paid to them,
and the two per cent. per annum at which they would then be taken from
them. The result might possibly be a temporary drain of gold from this
side.

But it is when a home and a foreign efflux of gold occur at the
same time that the situation becomes serious, and unless immediate
action is taken by the directors of the Bank of England to check the
outflow, there is always the danger--so small is our gold reserve when
contrasted with our exports and imports--that a balance against us at
an unlucky moment may create an awkward tension, which, unless speedily
relieved, may possibly produce a crisis.

We like to flatter ourselves that England is always safe; but so large
is the amount of bills offering from day to day in the London money
market that the very doubt of there not being sufficient capital in
the possession of the banks to discount them creates uneasiness; and
if it were thought that the Bank of England, which holds the few
millions of reserve upon which hundreds of millions of credit rest,
could not retain its gold, excitement would reach fever pitch in this
country, for everybody's income would be in danger, and the Government,
whose supineness allowed such a state of affairs to develop, would
be in danger too. But we know that, in the rate of discount, the
directors of the Bank possess an effective instrument to prevent such a
catastrophe, and have the experience to use it to advantage.

Money begins to leave the Bank for internal circulation during the
summer months in order to meet the demands created by the holidays and
the harvest, and then in October there is always the probability of a
large outflow of gold to the States to help pay for the crops imported
therefrom; while the movement of specie to Scotland in November,
occurring as it does just at a critical moment, is likely to cause some
apprehension, should the Bank's reserve have been depleted earlier,
unless the fact that it is merely a temporary transfer to enable the
Scotch banks to comply with the Act of 1845 be thoroughly grasped.

The October drain of gold from the Bank when the New York exchange is
unfavourable has in it an element of danger, especially if it happen at
a time when the reserve at the Bank of England is unusually low; and
if loanable capital be then abnormally scarce there is always the risk
that the end of the year requirements may produce a tension, which,
should credit be bad at the time, may develop into a panic.

If the Bank manage well, however, it fortunately often foresees that
the autumnal demands may possibly impose a severe temporary strain
upon its resources, and by raising its rate in anticipation of a short
period of exceptional demand, it attracts gold to itself in order to
be thoroughly prepared for possible large depletions of currency later
on, for it is easier to accumulate gold before the event than to check
an outflow when the movement is beginning to create uneasiness, and to
attract attention to the lack of preparedness on the part of the Bank
to meet large withdrawals of specie for export.

It is not my intention to write a treatise on the foreign exchanges,
and I am quite well aware that I have only touched on the fringe of a
great subject; but if these illustrations help, however slightly, to
elucidate certain of those undercurrents which determine prices, then
the sole aim of this chapter has been attained.




CHAPTER IX.

Banks and the Creation of Credit.


We have seen how the Bank of England came to occupy so commanding a
position in the money market, and we now have to consider why its rate
of discount is still a fairly reliable index to the value of loanable
capital. Its advent was extremely distasteful to the private bankers,
who then reigned supreme in London, and who were not slow to recognise
in the new corporation a formidable competitor, for a company which
financed the Government was obviously to be feared. Before 1826 the
Bank of England was the only joint stock bank in the country. Its
notes gradually drove those of the London bankers out of circulation,
and until its joint stock rivals firmly established themselves in the
Metropolis, the Bank was in every sense the most powerful institution
of its kind in the land.

Being by far the largest lender of capital in the country, it was only
natural that its rate should accurately interpret those forces which
make loanable capital dear or cheap, as the case may be. But the Bank
could not arbitrarily fix the value of money for a very considerable
period, even when it was able to issue notes without let or hindrance,
any more than it can now. Supply and demand must settle that
ultimately; and whenever the Bank inflated prices by the over-issue
of paper, we have seen that the reaction produced thereby invariably
threatened its existence. This is easily explained.

Persons borrow money in order that they may trade with it; and sudden
loans of large amounts of capital in the shape of notes immediately
stimulate the markets, and the increased demand engendered thereby
causes the prices of commodities to rise. Rising prices, whether
of securities or goods, give a marked impetus to speculation--so
hopeful are traders directly markets begin to improve; and increased
speculation causes further rises in the prices of both commodities
and loanable capital. Everybody wants to borrow, and to share, in the
coming period of great prosperity.

With prices rising here, imports naturally increase, as foreigners
are anxious to sell their goods in the best market. On the other
hand, the English markets have become less profitable to buyers, and,
consequently, exports fall off, the result being that the balance of
our indebtedness to other nations is largely increased. The foreign
exchanges soon begin to move against England, and the Bank of England
(we will assume) which had created the speculation by large issues
of notes, suddenly finds that it is threatened with a foreign drain
of gold, and is compelled to raise its rate in order to protect its
reserve.

Since 1844 this power has, of course, been taken out of the hands of
the Bank; but it is evident that, even before that date, the Bank of
England could not fix the rate of discount, for whenever it made the
attempt it failed signally. The above illustration fully explains the
reason why. Both before and after the Act the Bank of England would
have suspended payment upon more than one occasion, when it neglected
to keep an adequate reserve, but for Government intervention; and
it will be in the same plight again if it trade with too large a
proportion of its resources.

The Bank was then by far the largest dealer in credit, and from time
to time it stated the minimum rate at which it would lend or discount.
But the private bankers were at liberty to underbid it; and although
it could, by making sudden advances, cause money to fall in value,
its power was not of a lasting character, and the rise which followed
was quite beyond its control. Its rivals are now much more powerful,
and the Bank is only one large dealer among many--therefore it has to
either raise or lower its rate according to the demands made upon its
resources; but from its position in the centre of the money market it
still possesses a latent power for possible evil, which appears to have
escaped the attention it deserves.

This brings us to the vexed question of the creation of credit by a
bank, and though it is stoutly maintained that an ordinary banking
company cannot create credit, I venture to think that, given certain
conditions, it does. But perhaps, before proceeding further, it will be
better to briefly discuss the Clearing House system.

Cheques and bills, we all know, pour up to London in a constant stream
to the numerous banks, and are presented by them either to the firms
upon whom they are drawn or to their agents at the Lombard Street
Clearing House. As every bank which is a member of the Clearing House
keeps an account with the Bank of England, the debit and credit
balances (the result of this exchange) are adjusted in the books of
the Bank at the end of each day, and so, though the balances standing
to the credit of the various banks are diminished or increased, the
total sum to the credit of all the clearing bankers remains unaltered.
In other words, the balances, which are the outcome of the exchange
of credit documents at the Clearing House, are finally arranged by
transfer entries in the books of the Bank of England.

Every cheque presented in the House is debited to one bank and credited
by another, therefore the totals of the debit and credit entries must
agree; and if the totals are the same, then the debit and credit
balances must agree also. In the smaller towns the banks exchange the
local cheques between themselves, and settle the balances in cash or
by payments through London. But Birmingham, Bristol, Leeds, Leicester,
Liverpool, Manchester, and Newcastle-on-Tyne have Clearing Houses of
their own at which local cheques and bills are presented.

We can now approach the question of the creation of credit by a bank.
Suppose a bank suddenly increases its advances to its customers by
£1,000,000, and that the customers pay away the whole sum by cheques.
The said cheques are, say, paid by the recipients to the credit of
their accounts with other banks, which present them at the London
Clearing House. The balance of the bank which made the advance is
thereby reduced £1,000,000 at the Bank, and the accounts of other
banks are credited to the same extent; so the deposits at the Bank of
England are not reduced one penny by the transfer. But £1,000,000 has
been added to the working resources of the other banks; and as the
liabilities of the bank that made the advance have not been reduced,
surely this is a creation of credit? Of course, the bank which made the
loan has lost £1,000,000 in "cash" at the Bank of England, and that
asset would then be merged in "advances," which are up £1,000,000;
and though the bank has not created credit in its own books, it has
in those of its rivals. Surely, then, every bank which makes a new
advance to a customer, who employs the sum placed to his credit to
cancel certain debts of his own, creates credit in the books of other
institutions. But the Bank of England can also create credit in its own.

On the other hand, say, Bank A calls in £1,000,000 from the bill
brokers, who obtain credit to the extent of £1,000,000 from, say,
Bank C, and draw cheques thereupon, and hand them to Bank A, which
takes them to the Clearing House. C's balance at the Bank is reduced
by £1,000,000, and A's is increased by a like sum; but in neither
case is the "liabilities" side of the balance sheet affected. It is
a mere transfer of credit from one account on the "assets" side to
another on the same side, while the bankers' balances at the Bank of
England remain the same. However, should Bank A advance £1,000,000 to a
customer, who draws cheques against it, then the creation of credit in
the books of other banks begins, as illustrated by our first example.

Again, take the case of a bank which sells securities, say Consols, to
the amount of £1,000,000. It receives cheques upon other banks for a
like sum; and these it takes to the Clearing House, where it presents
them to those banks upon which they are drawn. The result is that the
selling bank's balance at the Bank is up £1,000,000, and that the
accounts of the other banks are down £1,000,000; but their liabilities
also are down £1,000,000, whereas the liabilities of the selling bank
are precisely the same. It has simply transferred £1,000,000 from
Consols to "cash" at the Bank of England on the "assets" side of its
balance sheet. Such a sale has reduced the floating capital of the
banks by £1,000,000. Further, could not a little "window dressing" be
done in this manner were a bank to find itself short of "cash" at the
end of the half-year? By lending the sum so obtained the selling bank
could create an amount of credit in the books of its rivals similar to
that which it had previously destroyed. By buying stock back, too, it
would produce exactly the same effect as if it made a loan.

Now we come to the creation of credit by the Bank of England in its own
books. Were the Bank to suddenly lend £3,000,000, the "Other Deposits"
would be up to that extent, and "Other Securities" would also be up to
a like amount, because the Bank would credit its customers and debit
the loans. Both sides of its return are increased, but, so far, credit
has not been created by these mere book entries, though the way for
its creation has been prepared. The customers or persons to whom the
advances have been made begin to draw upon their accounts by cheques,
and as these cheques are returned by the other bankers to the credit
of their accounts (bankers' balances) it follows that "Other Deposits"
are not reduced at the Bank. The Bank, then, has created £3,000,000
of credit in its books, and though it can no longer make sudden loans
by a huge issue of notes as was possible prior to 1844, yet, because
it holds the bankers' balances, we can see that it is able to produce
precisely the same effect by means of another instrument.

If the Bank lends £3,000,000 to the Government, "Public Deposits" and
"Government Securities" advance proportionately. When the Government
begins to pay out, then a large part of this sum returns to "Bankers'
Balances," and credit is created at the Bank of England to the extent
of the sum so returned. But the banks (Lombard Street) have more to
lend; therefore money is made artificially cheap.

On the other hand, the Government sometimes borrows in the open market
on Treasury bills. Credit is then transferred at the Bank through the
medium of the Clearing House from "Bankers' Balances" to "Public
Deposits." The resources of Lombard Street are reduced, and until
Government disbursements are made, and credit thereby transferred to
Lombard Street, money becomes tight, and borrowers are often driven to
the Bank.

We have seen that in the end an over-issue of notes is certain to
reduce the Bank's reserve to a dangerously low level, and that,
therefore, directors who know their business would hesitate to make so
risky an experiment. The same argument is equally applicable to the
creation of credit by sudden large loans on the part of the Bank in its
own books. Such loans, we have seen, increase both sides of the return;
but the Bank's reserve of notes and coin in the Banking Department
remains at the same figures, consequently, its ratio per cent. to
liabilities shows an ominous decline, which is, of itself, a warning
that something is wrong.

Let us assume that the Bank suddenly lends £5,000,000. Money is thereby
made artificially cheap, and the market rate for bills must fall in
consequence. But the bankers' balances have been increased in the books
of the Bank of England, and Lombard Street is not going to quietly
look on while Threadneedle Street does all the business. Consequently,
the bankers lend a portion of their balances at lower rates still,
in order to attract business to themselves, and the market rate falls
again. Here we have a situation analogous to that described in the
earlier part of this chapter.

Now suppose this movement took place in October, and that a drain of
gold occurred outwards. The Bank, in order to arrest the said drain,
would have to raise its rate, and to bring the market rate in touch
with its own it would be compelled to sell Consols, thereby reducing
the bankers' balances in its books, and, of course, lessening the power
of the banks to lend. But such a process is an expensive one, for
the Bank is in reality borrowing back at panic prices the capital it
created during a time of temporary ease.

Although the Bank undoubtedly possesses this power, the directors
are not likely to abuse it, because the risk incurred is out of
all proportion to the possible gain if the deal is carried through
successfully; so we may say that their power to create credit in their
books is limited or regulated by the ratio per cent. of the Bank's
reserve to its liabilities.

Of course, it may be asked: Is it safe to entrust such power to a board
of directors who have to earn dividends for a body of stockholders?

That is a difficult question to answer, and one, moreover, to which
there is no occasion to reply in this work. It may safely be said that
no director who understands his business would take the risk upon any
consideration; but there is the remote chance that an incompetent
Governor might be placed at the helm, and in that event, however
improbable, should he lose sight of everything but the dividends, he
might create a terrible panic throughout the land. On the other hand,
all who see the Bank return from week to week may read the signs, and
should the ratio fall abnormally low the critics would flagellate the
Governor unmercifully, and the business man, who is unaccustomed to the
pleasantries of criticism, unless he be a most hardened member of his
species, squirms under such a lash, fearful that his friends may read
just what the Press thinks of him; so he takes heed.

Though the Bank's rate is not always the same as the market rate, it
is seldom very much out of touch therewith. When the directors find
that their rate of discount is too high to attract custom, then, if
the reserve be also high, they lower their minimum in order to get a
fair share of the business that is doing. Their other alternative, of
course, is to borrow on stock, and in that manner to compel the bill
brokers to pay them a reluctant visit.

The policy of the Bank has never been one of "grab," though the bill
brokers often grumble; but its position, in relation to the market,
is an extremely difficult one, so difficult at times as to be fraught
with great anxiety; and remembering the power that devolves upon it
by reason of its holding the bankers' balances, its policy seems one
of enviable restraint and moderation. But that is only what everybody
expects of the Bank of England.




CHAPTER X.

The Battle of the Banks.


But little has hitherto been said concerning the relations of the Bank
of England with its rivals in the money market, and in order to trace
the movement from its beginning we must return to 1826, in which year
joint stock banks could be established in England at a greater distance
than sixty-five miles from London. The Bank stoutly resisted this
innovation, but the Government, in consequence of the constant failures
of the country private bankers, passed the Act of 1826, and the thin
edge of the wedge once inserted, the Bank's monopoly in London soon
disappeared.

The London and Westminster, despite the determined opposition of the
Bank of England, opened business in London during 1834, and the Bank's
monopoly of banking was gone. All that then remained to it was the
exclusive privilege of issuing notes in and within sixty-five miles
of London, the only legal monopoly it still enjoys. Unable to keep the
joint stock banks out of London the Bank actively opposed them, as also
did the private bankers, who, while the Bank refused to open accounts
for the new companies in its books, declined to admit them into the
Clearing House, which was founded by the London bankers about 1775. The
irony of Fate! They are now a feeble minority in a house of their own
building. But history--both domestic and economic--can supply parallel
instances.

Although the new system was destined to drive out the old, the joint
stock banks made a bad start, and failures were at first so frequent
that the public began to share the opinion of the Bank and to look upon
them as anything but safe institutions. They were born in disaster, and
their policy did not provide an antidote to the old evils; but, like
the Bank of England itself, they were taught prudence by a series of
panics and upheavals which threatened to wipe them out of existence.
They were, in short, licked into shape, and that cautious prudent
policy which now distinguishes our great banking companies is the fruit
of a very bitter experience.

Towards the middle of the nineteenth century the manufactures of Great
Britain began to increase by leaps and bounds, and population, which
always augments rapidly when food is cheap and abundant, kept pace with
the country's unprecedented commercial activity. In 1801 the population
of London was less than one million. In 1837 it had increased to about
two millions; and at the present time Greater London contains over six
and a half millions.

It is quite evident that the Bank of England could not alone minister
to the increasing wants of London, and both in the Metropolis and in
the provinces its joint stock rivals rapidly accumulated credit. In
June, 1854, the new banks were admitted into the Clearing House, and
since that date they have carried all before them. They shared in
the almost magical increase in the volume of British trade, but they
neither created nor provided the incentive to that remarkable outburst
of national prosperity which was the result of Free Trade, and which
made this country the workshop of the world. Since then, however, the
world has filled up.

The population of the United States in 1870 was 38,500,000; in
1900, 75,500,000. In 1871 the population of the German Empire was
41,000,000. In 1901 it had increased to 56,000,000. During the same
period the population of the United Kingdom increased from 31,500,000
to 41,500,000. There are more people in the world to be fed, and as the
earth fills up the struggle for existence must surely become fiercer.
Noticing this, people naturally inquire whether, seeing the changed
environment, Free Trade is suitable to the times. Some years ago, when
trade was bad, the bimetallic controversy was raging, but since 1895
its advocates have been dumb, for the simple reason that people will
not listen to theorists when times are good. They are then too intent
upon making money. They think they may not get the chance again.

No doubt, when the depressed portion of the cycle came round
bimetallists would have been heard again. But in the place of
Bimetallism we now find Protection, and, in all truth, the question is
serious enough; for, when the present wave of prosperity dies out in
the States, there seems every probability that the huge American trusts
will endeavour to swamp our markets with their goods. Free traders make
quite a profession of faith of their commercial opinion. They declare
that they are free traders with the same fervour they might infuse
into the avowal that they were Protestants or Roman Catholics. But
modern Christianity is eminently adaptable to every fresh situation. Is
Free Trade?

The worse the times become, the louder, probably, will grow the
controversy between the free traders and the protectionists; and when
we remember that our workshops support our credit, and upon what an
amazingly small reserve of the precious metals that credit is based, it
is evident that the question ought to be approached with the greatest
caution; for a decision that emptied our workshops would ruin the
nation.

As the savings of the country increased, the joint stock banks
accumulated credit with astonishing rapidity, and the Bank of England,
slow to recognise the power of the new system, which was so admirably
suited to the changed environment, was compelled to receive its hated
rivals into the fold. The companies possessed no vaults for the storage
of the precious metals on a large scale, and they were therefore glad
to avail themselves of the facilities at the disposal of the Bank,
whose premises were much better protected than their own. And then,
again, as the Bank's notes were legal tender, the companies could send
them from the head offices to the branches cheaply, while they were a
convenient form in which to keep a certain proportion of their cash in
hand.

The evolution of the Bank of England, we can see, has not proceeded
smoothly; but it is remarkable that an institution, which owed its
pre-eminence entirely to monopoly, did not gradually begin to sink into
a second-rate banking company directly its exclusive privilege of joint
stock banking was abrogated and free trade in banking established in
England. So conservative was the Bank's policy that it seems little
short of marvellous that its joint stock rivals should have quietly
endured its studied insults. The new movement was then, however,
not only in its infancy, but was under a cloud as well, and through
the companies grouping themselves around the Bank they enabled that
institution to retain its position in the centre of the money market.
The power incident to that position has been fully explained in the
previous chapter.

The London private bankers, whose lack of enterprise can only be
attributed to the fact that they were imbued with those narrow City
traditions which make London the home of Conservatism, also quite
failed to grasp the situation, and allowed the new companies to expand
in every direction, confident that so sudden a change must end in
disaster, and, therefore, they were content to look on, to shake their
heads sadly at the unprofessional conduct of those new banks, and to
soothe their feelings by ever and anon declaring, with due solemnity,
that joint stock banking would ruin the country.

Certainly, the new companies did not manage well at first, and a few
of them were wiped out in consequence; but, in spite of mistakes, they
progressed, because their system was adaptable to the requirements of
a growing England. In these times it is the fashion to apotheosise
man--to picture him as a kind of demi-god; therefore, it is asserted
that man makes his mark on the times. But it is surely more rational
and logical to assume that the times gradually mould the particular
cast of brain that is adaptable to a constantly changing environment,
and that the man who chances to possess that cast of brain goes with
the tide--which takes him a long way. At any rate, such was the case
with the joint stock banks, which owe their success entirely to the
adaptability of their system to a changing market. Moreover, that
market is still changing.

The old-fashioned London bankers found, to their great surprise, that
they had not read the signs of the times aright; but the orthodox
seldom play the _rôle_ of a prophet successfully, because they have
lived too long in one groove, and so are apt to forget that England is
not the world, which is steadily increasing in population. Instead of
failing, the joint stock banks merely occupied the ground, and, by so
doing, confined the business of the London private banker to the one
street in which he was established and in which his father lived before
him. They had no respect for age--those new companies!

The joint stock banks spread their tentacles north, south, east, and
west of his sacred City, thereby effectually preventing his expansion,
and "concentrating" his energies in the one street aforesaid, just
as the nations of Europe have "concentrated" the kingdom of the
unspeakable Turk. Great movements seldom originate within London, which
is strikingly lacking in originality, and that new blood from the
provinces which flows in an ever-increasing stream towards the great
City, and alone arrests decay, also seems to bring with it the new
ideas.

The London private bankers waited in vain for the expected
disappearance of their rivals, who, despite severe panics and crises,
continued to add rapidly to their resources, until, surrounded by rival
branches, profitable expansion became difficult for the private banker,
whose business is now so localised as to render effective competition
with the companies impossible. He cannot make rapid progress because he
does not possess the branches through which alone the necessary credit
can flow to the central office, and therefore the extinction of private
banking in its present form seems only a question of time, for the
wealthy are certain to deal with those banks whose vast accumulations
are at least the outward and visible sign of the confidence the public
has in their stability.

But the joint stock banks did not confine their energies to London. The
London and South Western Bank, which was established in 1862, began a
vigorous crusade in the London suburbs, with the happiest results to
its shareholders; and the London and Provincial Bank, which was formed
two years later--in 1864--established small suburban branches in every
direction, with equally satisfactory returns for its enterprise; while
the London and County, larger and, perhaps, more cautious than either,
also recognised the advantages of suburban expansion. A branch bank
belonging to one of these three banks is now to be found in almost
every London suburb.

The London and Westminster Bank (established in 1834) was the first
in the field, but the atmosphere of the City is not favourable to
progress, and the Westminster, though an exceptionally strong and
well-managed bank, undoubtedly failed to move with the times. So,
too, did the London Joint Stock Bank and the Union Bank of London,
which has recently somewhat altered its name. It was not until the
provincial joint stock banks invaded London that these companies began
to realise the opportunity they had missed; Lloyd's and Parr's Banks
however, evidently taking in the situation, adopted the new system, and
by skilful amalgamations rapidly forced themselves to the front. The
country banks, in short, practically took possession of Lombard Street.

Why the Bank of England did not share the same fate as the private
bankers has already been demonstrated. It certainly was not one whit
better informed than they; and it sympathised with them in their
distrust of the intruders, whose speedy downfall it quite expected to
witness. That the joint stock banks must come to grief was the opinion
of the majority of City men in 1834, and the then directors of the Bank
were City men imbued with those tenets which found credence within the
sacred square mile.

The bank which keeps the Government account must always be a great
power in the land. Had that account been removed in 1844, together with
the last vestige of monopoly, the Bank--the directors of which shared
to the full in that tenacity and narrow-mindedness characteristic of
wealthy City merchants, whose businesses, and therefore whose ideas,
flow in the narrowest of grooves--must have ceased to be a progressive
institution. But no Government has ever hinted at deserting the Bank,
whose record, though bristling with mistakes, is one of unbroken
integrity; and the public has always looked upon its management as
above suspicion. Especially was this the case during the first few
decades of the new movement.

The Bank of England had public opinion behind it; and the joint stock
banks, concerning whose stability opinion was divided, were not then
strong enough to keep their own reserves and to defy the Bank; but when
their system had stood the test of time, the Bank opened its doors to
them, and the companies meekly bowed to the inevitable--for they were
not the power in Lombard Street in those days that they are now.

In the first instance, we found the private bankers grouped around
the Bank; and now we see our huge joint stock banking companies in a
similar relation to her. They kept their reserves with her when their
system was in its infancy, when the Bank of England, as a result of
monopoly, was the greatest credit institution in the country. As the
companies spread their tentacles throughout the land, accumulating
credit at an extremely rapid pace, those reserves grew proportionately,
until, to-day, we find the Bank of England in the centre of a system
which owes over £910,000,000 in _cash_ to the public.

Our modern credit system has developed around the Bank, which, as
the holder of the bankers' reserves, now occupies an almost national
position. That position is, undoubtedly, the indirect result of a
monopoly which, prior to 1826, enabled the Bank of England to build
up a huge business unopposed by others of its kind. In other words,
it had a start of 132 years. The greater, consequently, attracted the
smaller. But united Lombard Street is now a much greater power than
Threadneedle Street--therefore it is always wise to remember that the
Bank of England can only retain its position in the centre of the money
market so long as Lombard Street is agreed that it shall.

The banks are not legally obliged to keep their reserves with the Bank
of England. Were they so inclined, they could withdraw them to-morrow
and accumulate stores of the precious metals of their own. It follows,
therefore, that the best of feeling should exist between the "Old Lady"
and Lombard Street. Obviously she is not now in a position to dictate
her own terms, as her greatest power is derived from the "bankers'
balances" on the left-hand side of her balance sheet.

Perhaps it is now easier to understand that the Bank of England, when
it from time to time states the lowest rate at which it will discount
bills for outsiders, occupies the position of a most important lender,
whose minimum rate, though not always the market rate, is seldom either
greatly above or below those of its rivals.




CHAPTER XI.

The London Money Market.


It is usual, when describing the Money Market, to assert that it
consists of the numerous banks in the City of London; but it seems to
me that, in reality, the money market extends throughout the United
Kingdom, for wherever there is a bank or a branch bank there is a
market for money. Moreover, the demand arising for loanable capital
in the provinces largely influences the rates of interest ruling from
time to time in London, because, if demand is brisk in the country, the
banks have less to lend in London, consequently the rate advances there.

When reference is made to the money market the London short loan
fund is invariably meant, and we now have to consider how this fund
is formed. The banks, which are liable to the public for huge sums
of money at call and short notice, are obliged to keep a certain
proportion of cash in their tills and strong rooms and with the Bank of
England in order to be prepared for any sudden demand that may be made
upon them.

Their cash in hand is, of course, required to meet the ordinary demands
of a banking business, and that deposited with the Bank of England is
held as a reserve fund against those risks of withdrawal from which a
credit institution owing immense sums at call is never free. Roughly
speaking, a well-managed bank would keep, say, six per cent. of its
public liabilities in legal tender on the premises, and a further ten
to twelve per cent. at its credit in the books of the Bank of England.
The latter accumulation might be called the bank's _real_ reserve, for
it is upon this that it would have to rely during a run.

Secondly, from eighteen to thirty per cent. of its liabilities to
the public would be invested in first class securities. Those of and
guaranteed by the British Government are in great request for this
purpose, as the Bank of England would not hesitate to advance against
such investments should a company find itself compelled to meet a
sudden drain upon its resources. Every prudent banker therefore takes
care that a large proportion of these securities is included in his
list, which would also contain Metropolitan and other Corporation
Stocks, English Railway Debentures, Colonial Government Securities, and
so on. A banker's list, in short, should be a so-called "gilt-edged"
one.

Thirdly, a banker lends a certain proportion of his deposits in the
London money market. Some banks have eight per cent. there, some
fourteen per cent., and others from fifteen to twenty per cent., though
the larger and better managed companies generally employ from seven
to fourteen per cent. therein. A certain amount of this "call money,"
however, represents money which has been lent to jobbers and brokers
on the Stock Exchange for "carrying over" purposes at the various
settlements, but by far the larger part of it is money which has been
lent to the bill brokers and discount houses.

In no sense can this asset in the balance sheets of the banks be looked
upon as a reserve. It is money invested in the London short loan
market--money lent to the bill brokers, who, in times of bad credit,
might not be able to repay it on demand. Just at the very moment
when bankers are most in need, this asset is the least available;
therefore, it is about the worst possible form in which the reserve of
a credit institution, owing large sums at call, can be invested.

As a credit bank's debts are due at call and short notice, a true
reserve can only consist of legal tender, and the till money, which
is required in the ordinary course of business during normal times,
certainly cannot be classed with that reserve. When considering what
is a bank's real cash reserve, we ought to deduct from four to five
per cent. from the ratio of cash in hand and with the Bank of England
to liabilities, for a trader would not include the cash required from
day to day in his business with any reserve he might accumulate against
accidents.

Reverting to investments, we might take Consols as an illustration of
their liquidity. During normal times Consols can be sold for cash at
any moment, but it is otherwise in a time of panic, when practically
everybody wants either to sell them or to borrow upon them. The market
is then disorganised, and people require either gold or large credits
at their bankers--not securities. Hence, even Consols are unsaleable
when a panic develops into a crisis.

As the Bank of England holds the cash reserve of the nation, it alone
can advance against securities in the midst of a crisis, and those
banks which were caught short would then have to apply to the Bank
for help. The Bank certainly would not lend upon any but gilt-edged
securities during a time of stress, and if their customers then made a
call upon them those companies which held second-rate investments would
have to close their doors, as they could not obtain assistance from any
other source. A strong list of securities is, therefore, essential to
every bank that is anxious to protect its customers against disaster.

These three assets (cash in hand and at the Bank of England, money at
call and notice, and investments) constitute a bank's so-called liquid
assets. The ratio of total liquid assets to liabilities maintained by
the best English banks ranges from 43 to 78 per cent. The last-named
figures, which are quite exceptional in their strength, were published
by Stuckey's Banking Company. The remainder of a bank's resources is
employed in making advances and loans, and in discounting bills for its
clients, whilst a small proportion is locked up in premises.

We can now form some idea as to what the short loan fund of the London
money market really is. Immense sums are collected at the head offices
of the banks in London through their metropolitan and provincial
branches; and, as the demands of trade are always uncertain--now brisk,
then slack--it is impossible for them to invest all their surplus
capital in securities; consequently, a certain portion of it finds
remunerative employment in this channel.

A huge stream of credit is constantly circulating through the three
kingdoms, and London, so to speak, is the heart of the system. In years
of active or good trade this stream increases in volume, and during
years of depression it contracts; yet it is difficult to say whether or
not the resources of the banks (the floating capital of the country)
are appreciably lessened during a period of temporary depression,
although the national turnover unquestionably is, as may be seen by the
Clearing House returns. During years of rising prices and increasing
trade activity profits are augmented, and, consequently, the resources
of the banks are swollen; but when the profits are invested within the
country, a similar amount of credit is returned to the banks by those
who have sold their securities, and though less capital is created
when trade is dull, it is questionable whether the resources of the
banks then shrink very greatly, unless foreign securities are largely
purchased.

We have seen that this stream of credit flows to London, and as demand
throughout the country is not sufficiently strong to attract it all
back again, a large fund of loanable capital accumulates in the hands
of the London banks, and flows from them to the bill brokers, who
employ it in discounting bills of exchange. But though by far the
greater part of the London short loan fund is accumulated in this
manner by the banks, other firms and companies also discharge their
surplus capital into it. The pool, of course, is not a stagnant one,
for capital is constantly flowing in and out.

The India Council, for instance, lends large sums in the London short
loan market. The numerous foreign and colonial banks in London do
the same, and so, too, do many of the large insurance companies and
merchants, while during slack times money finds its way from the
Stock Exchange to the bill broking houses. At first sight it seems
strange that bankers should advance money to the bill brokers, and so
provide their rivals with capital with which to compete against them,
especially as the banks have discount departments of their own.

Let us, however, consider the position of the bill broker in relation
to the Bank of England and the money market.

Towards the beginning of the nineteenth century the broker acted as
agent for the country bankers, but this connection was naturally
severed when the country firms opened accounts with the London bankers,
and the broker, whose knowledge of bills was extensive, then transacted
business for himself. Through holding out for high rates, the London
private bankers drove a large amount of business into the hands of the
bill brokers, who, by confining their attention solely to this class
of credit document, came to be largely trusted by the joint stock
companies, which could not obtain servants with the special training of
their rivals.

In no other country has the bill broker such influence as in
England. In Paris, for instance, the customer discounts with his
banker, who re-discounts with the Bank of France; but in London, for
reasons already stated, bills find their way to the bill brokers,
who re-discount either with the banks or with the Bank of England.
Moreover, all the best bills get into the hands of the bill brokers,
who, at one time, only discounted the acceptances of the banks and the
larger houses; but they now take small trade bills, and, should the
banking business grow less profitable, it is questionable whether the
banks might not endeavour to dispense with the middleman whom they now
encourage.

We next have to consider the London money market as a whole. First we
find a system which comprises Lombard Street and Threadneedle Street.
In other words, the London banks, by keeping accounts with the Bank
of England (Threadneedle Street), have placed that institution in the
centre of the system, and we know the Bank derives great power from
this situation; but its power is not innate--it is derived through and
is dependent upon Lombard Street. This group we will call "the money
market" or "the market."

Then we have the bill brokers, of whom we will speak as "the outside
market." Every morning the bill broker goes from bank to bank inquiring
at what rates he can borrow; and if Lombard Street (the London banks)
cannot supply him with all the capital he requires, then he is
compelled to apply to the Bank of England, which, however, he always
endeavours to avoid, because the Bank invariably charges him a higher
rate than do the other banks.

The Bank of England is a great bank of discount: consequently, the
brokers are its rivals; so it is hardly reasonable to expect the Bank
to charge the same rates to them as to its own clients, seeing that
the brokers, by their competition, reduce the Bank's business. When
trade is brisk loanable capital is in considerable demand, and the
banks, therefore, have less money to lend to the bill brokers, who
consequently are then driven to the Bank, which holds the bankers'
balances.

But the Bank of England's position is an extremely delicate one; and
when the resources of Lombard Street are temporarily exhausted and
demand centres upon itself, it has to take care that its ratio of
reserve of notes and cash in the Banking Department does not sink
too low in proportion to its liabilities. Should the demand upon its
resources prove considerable, it raises its rate until the pressure
is reduced. As a large part of the trade of this country is conducted
through the medium of bills of exchange, it is absolutely essential
that there should always be a market for good bills. Otherwise, panic
and failures would be the result; so, were the Bank to refuse to take
bills from the brokers at a price, our credit system would collapse at
once, unless the banks themselves, determined to crush the brokers,
offered to deal direct with the holders. But the experiment would be
a most risky one to make. Moreover, it could not be attempted at a
critical moment.

When Lombard Street is not lending freely, or cannot lend further with
comparative safety, the Bank, by raising its rate of discount from time
to time, reduces the merchant's profit on each transaction, until at
last money becomes so dear that he finds that he is making little or
no profit on his goods. He therefore produces less, and, consequently,
discounts less, when the pressure upon the Bank relaxes.

So long as money may be obtained, let the price paid for it be what
it may, a sense of security pervades the community; but were it
whispered during a period of temporary tightness that the Bank refused
to discount good bills at any price, our credit system would be in
imminent danger, for the trade of the country would be at a standstill.
Further, did such a state of affairs continue for many days, the crash
would come, and the Bank of England would then be swept away with the
rest of the market. Our present system is so delicately poised that the
Bank simply dare not refuse to take good trade bills from the brokers.

We next come to the other side of the picture. The broker, when he goes
his rounds, sometimes finds that the surplus resources of the banks
are abundant, and that they are ready to let him have even more than
he requires. When he makes this discovery, he begins to higgle, to try
to ascertain the lowest rate certain banks are prepared to accept; for
the difference between the rate at which he discounts bills for his
own customers and the rate at which he re-discounts or borrows, is
his margin of profit, and he is naturally anxious to make it as wide
as possible. (The poor man, be it remembered, does not visit Lombard
Street simply because he finds the air pure and the society of bank
officials congenial.) He therefore does his best to discover those
banks which are in funds, and, having found them, to induce them to
lend as cheaply as possible. This he can do when loanable capital is
cheap and abundant, and the Bank of England probably doing but little
business. Possibly, though the Bank rate is at two and a half, bills
are being taken by the brokers at one and a half. Then the Bank, in
order to get business, either lowers its rate of discount or else, by
selling stock, endeavours to lessen the resources of Lombard Street.

If the Bank adopt the latter expedient, it usually sells Consols for
cash, and buys them back for the account, thereby temporarily reducing
"bankers' balances," and attracting business to itself. The banks,
having less to lend, raise their rates, which then approximate more
closely to the Bank rate.

The brokers often complain bitterly of this interference by the Bank
of England with the market's supply of loanable capital, asserting
that this artificial enhancement of rates by the reduction of bankers'
balances through the sale of stock affects their business injuriously,
and benefits the Bank but little; and it certainly is difficult to see
how the Bank of England can make a profit out of the transaction.

On the other hand, when the market rate is appreciably below the Bank
rate, it is impossible to attract foreign gold to London; and the Bank,
by borrowing on Consols, and making its rate representative, is acting
in the public interest, should it be desirable either to attract gold
to this country or to prevent its leaving these shores.

We can now see that the Bank of England, though it states its minimum
rate, is often powerless to transact business thereat; and, recognising
that its own rate is out of touch with the market rate, the Bank often
discounts bills for its own customers at the rates ruling in the open
market, as, were it to refuse to do so, its clients would naturally
take their bills to the cheapest house. When, however, Lombard Street
is empty, and the bill brokers are compelled to approach the Bank
which holds the final reserve, the Bank of England is frequently in a
position to charge its rivals one per cent. above its declared minimum,
and the bill brokers quite naturally feel a little sore. For this
reason they try every source of supply before making application to the
Bank.

As security against loans made to them the brokers usually deposit
either bills which they have discounted in the ordinary course of their
business or gilt-edged securities, but sometimes the bill broker's
credit is so good that the banks lend him money at call practically
without security. When securities are deposited they are of course
returned directly the loan is paid off.

There is also another little point to which attention may be drawn: to
wit--that, although the market we are discussing is a special market,
yet if a borrower's credit be good it is generally possible to obtain
an advance either at or about Bank rate.




CHAPTER XII.

The Bank Rate and Stock Exchange Securities.


At the present time large advances are made by the banking companies to
members of the Stock Exchange, and it is supposed that at the beginning
of 1894, when the Bank rate fell to two per cent., and an investment
of surplus funds in the London short loan market brought in very poor
returns, the banks, tempted by higher rates, largely increased their
loans to the Stock Exchange. In 1890 rumour had it that a few of the
banks made rather heavy losses in connection with the South American
gamble, which brought down the firm of Barings; and the unanimity
they displayed, under the leadership of the late Mr. Lidderdale, in
supporting the tottering structure, certainly lends force to the
suggestion; for philanthropists are not to be found either in Lombard
Street or in Gorgonzola Hall.

The same rumour was circulated after the Kaffir boom in 1895, and
a little later it was whispered that some of the banks intended
curtailing their loans to the Stock Exchange, and that in future mining
shares would be received with the greatest circumspection. So close
is the connection between the banks and the "House" that the utmost
consternation prevailed when it was feared that the banks would not
touch certain stocks and shares of a fluctuating character. The mere
rumour created almost a panic among those dealers whose books were full
of the tabooed securities.

But 1895 was a bad year for the banking companies, and, from a dividend
point of view, 1896 was little better, for the Bank rate did not touch
two-and-a-half per cent. until September of that year. The short loan
market, therefore, was not a tempting place into which to pour surplus
deposits, so the banks apparently thought better of their decision (if
it were a decision), and continued their loans to the Stock Exchange on
the same liberal scale, because such loans yielded a much better return
than those to the bill brokers.

The very rumour that the banks intended increasing their margin on,
say, American Rails, would cause those securities to fall, and were
the threat actually executed, then, unless strong support came either
from the public or from New York, the result would be failures of weak
jobbers in that particular market, and a heavy fall in the prices of
American Railway securities. There is the same link between the other
markets of the Stock Exchange and the banks, and, such being the case,
it naturally follows that the prices of securities are influenced by
the abundance or scarcity of loanable capital, and that, therefore,
continuation rates fluctuate with the Bank rate.

But a very considerable proportion of the transactions conducted on the
Stock Exchange is of a speculative or gambling nature, in which those
mysterious persons called "bulls" and "bears" figure largely, and whose
object it is, not to invest savings in particular stocks and shares,
but to receive a cheque from their broker representing differences
due to them on the rise or fall of the securities in which they are
temporarily interested.

The "bull" buys stock because he believes that it will rise, and
that he will be able to sell it at a profit before the fortnightly
settlement comes round, but he does not pay for it; and if his sanguine
anticipation is not realised, so human and hopeful is he, that he
endeavours to obtain a loan on his stock through his broker in order
to carry it over to the next settlement, trusting that he will be able
to sell at a profit before contango day again comes round. The broker
sometimes obtains an advance on the stock through his banker, and so is
enabled to accommodate his client, whom he charges both interest and
commission. Again, the broker may carry over the stock through a jobber
or with a money broker who is a member of the "House," as the Stock
Exchange is colloquially called.

It has been suggested that some of these money brokers are in reality
agents of the banks--that, in short, they are the middlemen between the
banks and those who want to borrow on the Stock Exchange, just as the
bill broker is the middleman between the banks and those persons who
possess bills. The bill broker deposits the bills he has discounted for
his customers as security against a loan from the banker, and the money
broker deposits the stocks and shares against which he has advanced to
members of the Stock Exchange as security for a loan from the banker to
himself. His profit, therefore, like that of the bill broker, would be
the difference between the rate at which he borrows from the banker
and the rate at which he lends in the House. When large sums are
advanced in this manner the prices of stocks and shares are forced up
to fictitious figures in the hope that the public will come in and buy.
Yet the Stock Exchange Committee preaches about the iniquities of the
outside broker! Far be it from me to defend the possibly questionable
methods of the latter; but, to an unbiased observer, it sounds somewhat
like the pot calling the kettle black.

Huge sums of money are advanced every fortnight by the banks to the
money brokers and jobbers, principally against sold stocks and shares,
which are awaiting the arrival of _bonâ fide_ investors. The banks, of
course, require a good margin in order to cover themselves against loss
through any possible depreciation in the hypothecated securities, and
when the settlement or day of reckoning arrives, fresh loans are made,
or old advances are renewed, and the securities carried over to the
end of the account. A high rate of interest naturally makes "carrying
over" from account to account a very expensive operation, whilst an
abnormally high rate renders the process prohibitive.

When, therefore, the Bank rate is high and money is dear, a check is
immediately given to speculation on the Stock Exchange, because those
persons who have bought securities for a rise prefer to sell at a loss
before the settlement rather than pay excessive contango rates. It
follows, then, that dear money greatly reduces the dimensions of the
accounts open for the rise.

The banks, too, often become alarmed by the magnitude of the account,
and having demands upon them for capital elsewhere, they grow nervous
and lend less freely, at greatly enhanced rates, and then jobbers and
money brokers have to refuse a large number of applicants. The result
may be either a fall in the securities dealt in by a particular market
or a general depression throughout the House. Then the "bears" come in
and buy, take their profits, and are jubilant.

Conversely, a plethora of money and a low Bank rate encourage
speculation, as was the case before the boom of 1895. Continuation
rates are low, and capital comes out of trade into the better-class
securities, which begin to rise in consequence. Then, for a little
while, the "bulls" have it all their own way. But why does the
Committee pose as the friend of the _bonâ fide_ investor? It is a
little difficult to see where he comes in, unless it be in at the top
and out at the bottom. As a matter of fact, there is so much gambling
in securities taking place in the House that the genuine investor, if
he do not understand the market, falls an easy prey to the "bulls"
and "bears," who, by studying the habits of his kind, anticipate
their requirements, and, after taking a large bite, pass on their
hypothecated shares. On the other hand, the investor who studies the
markets sometimes waits patiently for exhausted "bulls" or sells to
frightened "bears." So, to those who know the game it is about as broad
as it is long.




CHAPTER XIII.

The Banks as Stockbrokers.


Were business on the Stock Exchange solely of an investment nature, it
has been suggested that that institution could dispense with over fifty
per cent. of its members, for, during recent years, a large amount of
the investment business of the country has drifted to the banks, which
place their orders in the hands of a few brokers, with whom they divide
the usual one-eighth per cent. commission. The large banking companies
are outside brokers, and so eager are some of them to attract this
class of business that they offer their clerks half the commission
received from the broker upon all business introduced by them. Seeing
that the average bank clerk is absolutely without experience of the
markets, touts of this variety are a source of danger to the public.

The banker who divides his share of the commission with the clerk who
introduces the business is satisfied with one-thirty-second per cent.
commission; but the broker, who only gets one-sixteenth instead of
one-eighth per cent., is, probably, less eager to make a close bargain
for a customer of the bank than for one of his own. On the other hand,
the volume of investment business which flows through the banks to the
Stock Exchange is so large that those brokers who are favoured with the
banks' custom must earn considerable sums by way of commission. Whether
orders from customers of the banks receive that individual attention
which the brokers give to those from their own clients is, however,
another matter.

Most of the banks have Stock Departments, to which orders are sent by
their country branches. These orders are steadily increasing, and the
tendency seems to be for a large number of the provincial public to do
their investment business through the banks. This class of business is,
therefore, gradually drifting to the banks, and doubtless, as time goes
on, the banking companies will become the recognised channel for the
_bonâ fide_ country investor.

It follows that the non-speculative business is getting into a few
hands, with the result that a large number of brokers on the Stock
Exchange are, so to speak, "starved," and consequently obliged to
turn their attention to the demand created by the more speculatively
disposed members of the public. Yet, strange to say, in spite of
the fact that orders are now diverted to the Stock Departments of
the London banks and that, therefore, fewer brokers are required
to transact the investment business of the country, the members of
the Stock Exchange are increasing numerically. Seeing that the safe
business is drifting through the banks into the hands of a few large
brokers we may well ask how the smaller men obtain a living from their
business?

The ground, year in year out, is being farmed assiduously by the
banks, whose large capital and established credit inspire widespread
confidence; and in the face of such competition the small broker's
chance of success does not seem encouraging. How can he make a
business? The banks, who place their orders with strong brokers,
guarantee those customers who deal through them against the
insolvency of both the broker and the jobber, and such a guarantee is
unquestionably worth having. The small broker, as a rule, possesses
very little capital; whereas the person who instructs his banker
either to buy or to sell is conscious that he is dealing through an
institution whose credit is practically unlimited, and whose resources
amount to many millions. He has not, therefore, to ask himself whether
his broker is safe, and this sense of security, inspired by a bank's
millions, undoubtedly causes many people who would rather do business
direct with a member of the Stock Exchange to deal with the banks.
Moreover, a bank official is quite well aware of this advantage, and
when a customer, who is undecided whether or not to employ a broker,
asks what inducement the bank holds out to him, he quietly replies:
"You have the bank's credit upon which to rely." Such an answer makes
a customer reflect. Further, it seldom fails to effect its purpose,
because, in the first place, it instils a doubt in the client's mind
regarding the means of his broker; and, in the second place, because he
cannot fail to recognise the greater security the bank affords him.

It is evident, then, that the small broker's path is bestrewn with
almost insuperable difficulties, and that it is extremely hard for him
to attract safe business. But the banking companies do not arrest the
flow of speculative orders to his books.

The banks, which have a horror of speculation, confine their attention
to the buying and selling of stocks and shares through their brokers.
Were they to encourage gambling in securities they are fully aware
that the result would be disastrous to the business of banking, for
a certain number of their customers would be sure to neglect their
business in the hope of snatching differences on the Stock Exchange,
and such a policy would end in a crisis that would bring the country to
the verge of ruin. For this reason alone the banks firmly and wisely
refuse to foster speculation among their clients.

Capital, we all know, is the savings of labour; consequently the
greater the profits made in trade during any one year, the larger is
the fund awaiting investment. Now, if the banks were to incite the
gambling fever among their customers, this fund would tend to diminish
each year, and, seeing that the prosperity of the country is entirely
dependent upon its trade, bankers, customers, and stockbrokers would
speedily become involved in common ruin. Small wonder, then, that our
large banking companies, which are responsible to the public for
millions of money--a large proportion of which they must be prepared to
return at any moment--decline to open speculative accounts for their
clients. It would be madness on the part of such institutions to divert
their customers' attention from trade to speculation in securities; and
for this reason the bank clerk as amateur commission agent seems a step
in the wrong direction.

Moreover, in this respect the policy of the banks appears
contradictory. Recognising the temptations to which their clerks are
exposed, it is their practice to instantly dismiss those men who
indulge a passion for betting; yet some of them deliberately encourage
their servants to tout for investment orders, apparently unconscious
of the fact that once their attention is drawn to the markets, some
of the clerks are almost certain to end by gambling for differences
on their own account. Helping themselves to the money of the banks is
probably the next step. Were not the question so serious, the fact
that directors cannot make so palpable a deduction would be positively
humorous, for it is evidently quite as undesirable, from their point of
view, that a clerk should bet upon a stock as upon a horse.

The modern credit system, it will be seen, places a very large part of
the safe or investment business in the hands of a minority of brokers,
who, like the bankers, much prefer to do a good commission business,
and to leave speculation to the smaller brokers, who have less to lose
than they. These favoured brokers have grown accustomed to sleeping
comfortably o' nights, undisturbed by the vision of settling day on
the morrow; and, quite blind to the cause of their enviable freedom
from care, they are disposed to be loud in their abuse of the risky
manner in which some of the smaller brokers conduct their business.
But, seeing that the non-speculative orders flow from the banks to
themselves, it would be interesting if they would attempt to explain
how the army of small brokers can live unless they cater for the wants
of the speculator. As a rule their capital is small, consequently they
cannot afford to wait years while they slowly build up a connection;
so, as the safe business is cornered, they accept the risky. This
they do, not from choice, but from necessity; and the Stock Exchange
Committee, in order to prevent additions to the ranks of these
undesirables, should take steps to reduce the number of members of
the Stock Exchange very considerably. Already the investors of this
country have to support a small army of over four thousand of them.

Of course, after every period of excitement, numerous weak members of
the Stock Exchange are weeded out, and, in a sense, the _bonâ fide_
investor is the pigeon that is plucked by the speculator. The bulls buy
in the fond hope that the investor will come in and relieve them of
their stock; and the bears sell securities which they do not possess,
trusting that investors will also sell, thereby enabling them to buy
at a low figure and to pass on their securities at a profit to those
to whom they have previously sold. The position is therefore often an
artificial one, created by operators for the rise or fall, and the
investor, unless he thoroughly understands the markets, is like a
pigeon among hawks.

The larger the number of members of the House, the greater is the
risk run by the investor who deals with a small broker; and as the
investment business of the country flows largely in a particular
channel, it is more than probable that, unless the Committee decides to
admit new members sparingly, a large number of small brokers will one
day be "hammered" after a period of intense excitement.




CHAPTER XIV.

The Short Loan Fund and the Price of Securities.


A certain proportion of the capital which flows into the London
short loan fund is invested in securities by the bill brokers and
the discount houses, and, as the said securities are deposited with
the bankers from time to time against temporary advances, it follows
that their choice is largely restricted to those of and guaranteed by
the British Government, because the margin exacted on the so-called
gilt-edged varieties is considerably less than that demanded upon the
more fluctuating stocks and shares.

The bankers themselves invest largely in the same class, and they also
employ vast sums in the short loan market; so that when the market rate
for bills is higher than the interest received upon, say, Consols,
the bankers are disposed to sell some of their Consols in order to
obtain the higher rates ruling in the outside market. Obviously, then,
any accretion or diminution in the short loan fund at once affects the
prices of gilt-edged securities. If the Bank rate be high, and also
representative, Consols ought to fall, and, conversely, if the Bank
of England's rate be low, trade dull, and the market rate of discount
smaller than the return on Consols, gilt-edged securities should rise.

If this be the case, a low Bank rate must give an immediate incentive
to speculation in securities, and, therefore, the condition of the
short loan fund is intimately connected with the prices of stocks and
shares, but more particularly with those securities in which lenders in
the money market largely invest. The banks--let the condition of the
money market be what it may--must, of course, always invest a certain
proportion of their resources in Consols, but the sum so invested is
not constant.

Again, powerful business firms and companies hold Government stock as
reserves against contingencies. The Government makes large purchases
in the Consol market on account of the Post Office Savings Bank and
the Sinking Fund, while numerous other "bull" points could be given.
However, the fact remains that cheap money provides a strong inducement
to large speculative purchases of Consols.

The large capitalists and those persons whose credit is good can borrow
at, and sometimes even slightly below, Bank rate on Consols from
the banks, which are satisfied with a small margin against possible
depreciation on Government securities. If, therefore, we examine the
period between February, 1894, and September, 1896, when the Bank rate
was stationary at two per cent., it will be possible to illustrate
this tendency. Day-to-day money was then sometimes quoted at one per
cent. and under, and this state of affairs occasionally extended over
protracted periods.

Now, suppose a person invested £20,000 in Consols at 112, and that his
banker agreed to advance £18,000 against them at, say, seven days'
notice at one per cent. per annum. Two-and-three-quarter Consols at
112 return £2 9s. per cent. (about). His annual income, therefore, on
£20,000 would amount to about £490; but he owed his banker one per
cent. on £18,000. Hence £180 must be deducted from £490. Upon a capital
of £2000 he therefore earned £310; and a return of fifteen-and-a-half
per cent. per annum on Consols is surely an excellent reward for his
skill. Of course, we must not forget possible depreciation; but seeing
that the banker's advance released £18,000, which he can use, he can
afford to take some risk.

The following example, however, affords a more practical illustration
of the possibilities of speculation in Consols during the depressed
portion of a cycle, when the prices of commodities are low and
loanable capital is cheap. First, we want to ascertain the movements
in this security from, say, 1894 to 1896, and of these the table given
hereunder supplies a good idea:--

  =========================================================================
                         |   1894.  |   1895.  |   1896.  |
         Goschen's       +----------+----------+----------+Bank rate from
  Two-and-three-quarters | Highest. | Highest. | Highest. |22nd Feb., 1894,
         per cent.       | 103⅝     | 108⅛     |   114    | to 9th Sept.,
     (Two-and-a-half     |          |          |          |    1896.
         per cent.       | Lowest.  |  Lowest. | Lowest.  |
          after          | 98⅜      | 103½     | 105⅛     | Two per cent.
     5th April, 1903)    |          |          |          |
  =========================================================================

Let us assume that a person invested £20,000 in Consols at parity in
1894, and arranged with his banker for a loan against them at Bank
rate, and that the banker's margin was to be ten per cent. on the
purchase price. He received, then, a loan of £18,000 from his banker,
so the amount of his own capital remaining in the venture was £2000.
Very probably, especially if his credit were beyond doubt, he would
have made a closer bargain with his banker, and thus have reduced the
margin slightly--but this is by the way.

Upon his £20,000 in Consols he obtained two-and-three-quarters per
cent., so that his annual income therefrom was £550. But as he had
to pay his banker two per cent. per annum on £18,000, £360 must be
deducted from £550. His capital in the speculation being £2000, he made
£190 thereupon. This gain works out at nine-and-a-half per cent. per
annum, and nine-and-a-half per cent. on Consols may surely be classed
among the minor forms of temptation. Moreover, as the Bank rate stood
at two per cent. for slightly over two years and a half, he had a long
run for his money.

But we see that he bought at parity, and that in 1896 Consols touched
114. Had he sold at 110 during that year, his £20,000 in Consols would
have realised £22,000. He, however, owed his banker £18,000, so there
remained £4000 to his credit. As his own capital in the speculation was
£2000 he would have exactly doubled it, and nine-and-a-half per cent.
per annum upon £2000 in Consols for close upon two years, with a bonus
of £2000 at the finish, is painfully reminiscent of those financial
dreams which so very seldom materialise; yet huge blocks of Consols
were actually bought during this period of two per cent., and dealt
with in the manner aforesaid.

Of course, the results were not always so satisfactory as those given
in the above illustrations, and no doubt many such ventures ended in
a loss, for prizes of this description are for the lucky few; though
it is usual to dwell upon them to the mortification of the mutable
many. The snatching of profits in this fashion requires skill and
considerable patience, and those persons who receive specious pamphlets
telling them how money is to be made in a marvellously short space of
time by an infallible system may appreciate the plausibility of my
illustrations, but yet should remember that they may find the results
of similar speculations in Consols very disappointing.

The demand for Government securities created by these speculative
operations is one of the causes which drive up the price of Consols
during periods of cheap money, but it is not by any means the only
cause. When the Bank rate advances, and capital can be employed more
advantageously in the London short loan market, this period soon comes
to an end, and consequent sales depress the Consol market.

Very many of the better class securities such as Colonial Government
stocks, Foreign Government securities, and so on, yield from three to
five per cent., and when the Bank of England rate is at from two to
two and a half, though the margin demanded upon such stocks is wider
than that required upon Consols, the difference between the interest
received in the shape of dividends and that paid as the price of a loan
often makes speculative dealings in them decidedly profitable. As the
Bank rate increases, and the speculator's profit margin consequently
narrows, the tendency is for stocks and shares so "carried" to fall in
value. The holders or gamblers then begin to sell, and as the increased
supply of such securities is certain not to be met by an enhanced
demand on the part of investors, prices must fall. Seeing the better
class securities declining in value, those investors who had previously
held aloof are tempted to come in, and the greater the reaction, the
stronger is the inducement to buy; consequently, the lower prices
recede the larger becomes the number of purchasers, until demand
overtakes supply and prices again begin to move upwards.

Broadly speaking, it is evident that, unless the markets are
disorganised by panic or by some disquieting political occurrence, the
prices of the so-called gilt-edged securities are influenced by the
conditions prevailing in the London short loan money market.




CHAPTER XV.

Panic Years.


When in 1667 a Dutch fleet sailed up the Medway, demolished a fort
at Sheerness, and, forcing a way into Chatham Docks, burnt all the
ships assembled therein, to the consternation of the inhabitants of
London, there was a run upon the banks; but a Stuart regarded both
events with equanimity, for "Old Rowley" had a mind above trifles of
this description, possibly because he had learnt many bitter truths
in a world seldom understood by Kings. Cynics are not born--they are
made; and Charles II. had drunk from that cup which sharpens the
understanding.

France, during 1719 and 1720, was in the throes of the Mississippi
scheme, which was engineered by that notorious Scotsman, John Law; and
England, in 1720, witnessed the collapse of the South Sea Company,
which Sir Robert Walpole, with rare insight and unerring financial
instinct, had demonstrated was a mere gamble, that, at the best, could
only enjoy a temporary success, which was absolutely dependent upon a
rise in the company's stock; but the Government turned a deaf ear to
his warning.

Scotland, we have seen, had its Darien venture in 1699; and in 1720 all
England went mad over the South Sea Company, which offered to relieve
the Government of part of the National Debt, and entered into an insane
competition with the Bank of England for that purpose. Then occurred
some spirited bidding between the two companies for this privilege;
but the directors of the Bank proved themselves the less mad, and left
their rival in possession of the incubus and the road to ruin.

The result of the bidding gave the necessary stimulus to the South Sea
Company's stock, and, seeing it going up, the public at once rushed in,
when the stock rose faster than ever. In a very short space of time
the fever for speculation infused itself into the blood of the whole
nation. The pace became so furious that the more thoughtful among the
gamblers began to see the end and to sell, with the result that, upon
a memorable morning, everybody wanted to dispose of his stock--and then
the bubble burst.

In June, 1720, the £100 stock of the South Sea Company was rushed up to
£890, and a little later it touched £1000. Then the tide turned, and,
as is invariably the case, all were as anxious to sell as a few days
before they had been eager to buy. Every hour intensified the panic,
until at length the stock fell to £175, and the difference between the
highest and lowest quotations is eloquent of the loss inflicted upon
the community, for everybody who had money to invest was interested in
this gigantic gamble.

Widespread misery and ruin followed. Suicide was of daily occurrence,
and, after a momentary lull in the storm, popular indignation lashed
itself into fury against the directors, for whom, it was openly
declared, hanging was too good a fate. The Government, thoroughly
alarmed, turned to the one strong man who had consistently opposed the
scheme, and who, in consequence, was at that moment the most popular
man in England; so Sir Robert Walpole stepped into the breach, and
stemmed the tide of popular indignation and national disaster.

At first Walpole was disposed to resort to half-measures, but when it
became apparent that the South Sea Company was rotten to the core and
that it must go at any price, he devised a scheme by which the East
India Company and the Bank of England took over £18,000,000 of South
Sea stock. The Bank directors, throughout this trying period, acted
with a strange lack of caution, and the situation was only saved by
Walpole's better judgment.

The period was one of mad speculation, and no venture was too absurd
to foist upon a public, which, until the crash came, did not display
a gleam of intelligence or discernment, so blinded was it by greed.
Naturally, those bankers who had advanced against South Sea stock
did not escape loss, and many of the goldsmiths and private bankers
were ruined by the reaction, while the Bank of England itself barely
escaped. It is interesting to notice that, even in 1720, the public
could only be tempted by a rising market; and it has remained true to
this instinct, as, for some unaccountable reason, the "bear" is always
looked upon as an undesirable kind of person.

The next disturbance of credit occurred in 1745, when the Young
Pretender, "Bonnie Prince Charlie," after defeating Sir John Cope at
Prestonpans, resolved to march on London, and penetrated as far as
Derby. The news of his arrival there reached London on the 4th December
(Black Friday), and the City was seized with so severe a panic that
business was suspended. Some of the citizens actually left the country,
and even the King made preparations for flight. Everybody then wished
to possess himself of gold, and a run at once began upon the Bank
of England, which was taken completely by surprise, and only saved
the situation by resorting to the expedient of paying its notes in
sixpences--a somewhat lengthy proceeding, but one which enabled it to
gain time. Nobody, however, would trust a Stuart, and the panic very
quickly subsided.

Learning that the Duke of Cumberland was advancing to meet him,
Charles was compelled by his followers to beat a hasty retreat towards
Scotland, and by the 23rd December the Highlanders had crossed the
border again. In January, 1746, they defeated General Hawley at
Falkirk, but in the following April the Prince lost the battle of
Culloden, which dealt the final blow to the hopes of the House of
Stuart.

The panics and crises between 1745 and 1857 have been discussed in
Chapters I. and II. of this book--principally in Chapter II.

The Crimean War, through which this country muddled, was brought to
a close in 1856, at a cost to the nation of £33,000,000; and it may
perhaps be interesting to compare this sum with the £230,000,000 which
has been expended in the South African struggle. Even for a Balaclava
£33,000,000 seems a dear price to pay. But £230,000,000 for a Colenso!
Glory makes a poor national asset.

In 1848 Lord Dalhousie carried out a policy of annexation in India
in a ruthless manner, and the native princes, thirsting for revenge,
insidiously propagated a rumour among the native soldiery of the East
India Company to the effect that the British Government was anxious to
Christianise them, knowing that the unsophisticated Hindu preferred his
sacred cow to the God of his conquerors, though he had probably little
faith in either.

At any rate, the princes appealed to the patriotism of the native
soldiers, who, in May, 1857, replied by refusing to accept the famous
"greased" cartridges, and in a few days the insurrectionary movement
was ablaze in India. The massacre at Cawnpore sent a thrill of horror
and indignation through the country, and Sir Colin Campbell (afterwards
Lord Clyde) was ordered post haste from England to take command of the
British troops. Naturally, our trade with India was disorganised; and,
speculation having exceeded all bounds in America, the grave news from
that country, combined with the outbreak in India, hastened on the
crisis of 1857.

Quite an epidemic of crime swept through England about the middle of
the nineteenth century, and many names well known in the City were
smirched, whilst even the firm of Overend and Gurney, whose credit was
then at its zenith, were said to have compounded a felony in order to
avoid a bad debt. Financial morality, which is at all times peculiar,
was at this period at its lowest ebb. So small wonder that when the
American banks failed by the dozen in 1857, a feeling of distrust
should make itself felt in this country, which was then engaged in a
fierce struggle in India.

Merchants and houses engaged in trade with India and America began
to fail, and in a very little while there was a run upon some of the
banks. Then followed the collapse of the Borough Bank, and Dennistoun's
of Liverpool. In Scotland the Western Bank and the City of Glasgow
Bank put up their shutters; and the failure in London of Sanderson
& Co., the well-known bill brokers, accentuated the grave condition
of credit, forcibly reminded the public that the rotten state of the
American railroads had ruined thousands of speculators in this country,
and generated in the public mind a feeling of positive alarm. The
result was a panic, which by 12th November culminated in a crisis. The
country then looked to the Government and to the Bank of England.

Both 1855 and 1856 were years of unusually high Bank rates, and during
1857 the demand for loanable capital became so pronounced that the Bank
of England, in order to protect its dwindling store of bullion, had to
raise its rate still further. The year opened with six per cent. In
July it fell to five-and-a-half per cent., but by 19th October it had
reached eight per cent. On 5th November nine per cent. was recorded;
and upon the 9th of the same month it was hurriedly raised to ten per
cent. Lombard Street had then practically arrived at the end of its
available resources; and demand, of course, centred itself upon the
bank which held the bankers' cash balances.

The Bank of England, as usual in those days, was quite unprepared to
meet a crisis, and made application for assistance to the Government.
Had help then been refused, it must inevitably have closed its doors,
for the reserve in its Banking Department on 13th November, 1857,
had fallen to £957,000, while it was rumoured that, at the close of
a particular day, the reduction was appreciably greater. In plain
English, the Bank of England was practically broken.

On 12th November the Government consented, for the second time since
1844, to the suspension of the Bank Charter Act; and when it became
known that the Bank of England was in a position to increase its
circulation to an unlimited extent, and to advance notes against the
better-class securities, the nervous tension created by the numerous
failures throughout the country instantly relaxed, and in a few days a
comparative calm followed the storm. Indeed, before the close of 1858
the Bank rate was down to two-and-a-half per cent.

The suspension of the Act during a crisis creates a market for
securities at the Bank of England. Furthermore, at so critical a moment
the Bank is the only market in existence; consequently those securities
in which it decides to deal are alone saleable, and we know that it
confines its advances solely to the so-called gilt-edged securities
and to good bills. Of course, if the public only thought, it would
instantly perceive that the more notes the Bank issues in excess of its
authorised amount the less secure is its position, because the smaller
is the proportion of gold in the Issue Department to its liabilities.
But the British public is led; it does not think. If it did we should
speedily be in the throes of a revolution.

The public thinks the Government lends its credit to the Bank, but in
reality it does nothing of the kind. It simply authorises the Bank
of England to break the law, and to advance notes at its discretion.
However, the credit of the Bank is so good that the public, seeing
that it has the "moral" support of the Government, possesses absolute
confidence in its stability; and though it trusts the Bank blindly and
unreasonably, that institution has earned its gratitude upon more than
one occasion, and its history, if full of mistakes, certainly entitles
it to this confidence.

Mention has been made of the failure of the Western Bank of Scotland
in 1857. This institution, besides advancing indiscreetly at home,
helped to finance the gamble in American securities; consequently,
when the crisis occurred in the United States, the bank found itself
saddled with huge blocks of unsaleable stocks and shares. Subsequent
investigation disclosed a most discreditable state of affairs.

In 1856 the Royal British Bank, after a short life of continual fraud,
came to the ground; and in 1857 the public learned that the notorious
Colonel Waugh had fled to Spain with considerable sums belonging to
the Eastern Banking Company. A little later, when it was discovered
that bank directors and auditors who, for a consideration, would attest
such statements as those issued by the Western Bank, could be found
in Scotland, the public came to the conclusion that a balance sheet
is worth little more than the paper upon which it is printed; and a
run at once began upon the rest of the Scotch banks, which promptly
arrested the panic by guaranteeing the notes of the insolvent Western
Bank of Scotland. The City of Glasgow Bank, though it closed its doors
temporarily during this period of fraud and distrust, succeeded in
weathering the storm, only to fail badly in 1878.

The relations between England and France were severely strained in
1859. A plot was hatched in London by an Italian secret society
against the life of Napoleon III., whose publication of a denunciation
of British hospitality sent a thrill of passionate resentment through
this country, which replied to his threat of invasion by the inception
of the volunteer movement. The call met with immediate response, for
nothing kindles enthusiasm so quickly as hate, and England, for the
first time in her history, created an army of citizen soldiers. At the
height of the frenzy there were ominous rumours, and for a little while
a state of panic prevailed; but the alarm soon subsided, and the next
year a commercial treaty was enacted with France.

During 1862 loanable capital was cheap, and in July that year the Bank
rate sank to two per cent., whilst at no time did it exceed three per
cent. With money abundant, the promoter was soon in evidence, and the
speculation fever once more took possession of the public, hundreds of
companies being registered under the Companies Act of 1862 within the
space of a few months, until dear money began to lessen the output of
limited liability concerns and the energies of that arch-enemy, the
promoter. In 1861 the United States was convulsed by civil war, which
caused a cessation of production there on a large scale, and produced a
cotton famine in this country. Lancashire, the centre of the industry,
could not obtain fresh supplies of the raw material when the ports
of the Southern States were blockaded, and early in January, 1863,
hundreds of thousands of operatives were out of employment. Speculation
instantly received a check, and the energies of the country were
concentrated upon raising huge sums for the alleviation of the distress
in Lancashire--for 500,000 unemployed workers might at any moment,
should their attitude become menacing, prove a danger to the State.

From 1863 to 1865 the Bank of England was undoubtedly face to face
with a serious situation, and, for the first time in its history, its
directors grasped the simple fact that only by maintaining a good
reserve can the country be saved from panics and crises. The year 1863
was one of high Bank rates, and during the autumn of 1864 pressure
upon the Bank's resources became so severe that a crisis was narrowly
averted. Supplies of cotton from America having practically ceased,
demand centred upon India, and the Bank of England, early in August,
had to support a drain of silver thither to help pay for the cotton
crop. On 4th August the Bank rate was raised to eight per cent., and
again on 8th September to nine per cent., at which figure it remained
until the 10th November, when it fell to eight again. The strain
upon the Bank was severe, but the crises of 1847 and 1857 had taught
their lesson, and by using the "Bank rate" with effect, the directors
succeeded in keeping a sufficient reserve in the Banking Department.

By about the middle of 1865 capital was cheap, but, towards the end of
that year, a decided stringency manifested itself, and at the beginning
of 1866 many companies which had been registered under the Act of 1862
failed. The banks, whose reserves were then much smaller than now,
came in for their share of distrust, and the failure of a Liverpool
firm for a large amount made the public uneasy; but when it was known
on the 11th May that Overend, Gurney & Co. had closed their doors, the
City was seized with panic, and streams of depositors rushed to Lombard
Street to withdraw their money from the banks, which, in a very short
time, were paying out at a rate it was impossible to maintain; and it
soon became evident that unless confidence were speedily restored the
banks must break.

The Bank of England had to meet large demands from the provincial
banks, for distrust was general throughout the country; consequently
at such a moment the country bankers required their reserves of cash
in their safes, so that they could immediately meet the demands of
the more nervous of their customers should necessity arise. The Bank
advanced its rate to seven per cent. on the 3rd May; to eight per
cent. on the 8th of the same month; and to nine per cent. on the
11th; and, the pressure becoming more intense, application was made
to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, with the result that the Bank of
England was authorised to break the Act if necessary, the Government's
condition being that the rate of discount should be ten per cent. while
the Act was in abeyance; so, on the 12th May, the Bank rate was raised
to ten per cent., where it remained until the 16th August following.

By the 16th May the reserve was reduced to £731,000, but directly it
became known that the Bank was in a position to advance notes against
approved securities the tension relaxed, thereby proving that the
public understood the cure as little as it did the disease--for it
was an act of madness to make the run, and equally as stupid not to
perceive that the issuing of unconvertible notes is at the best only
a quack remedy. However, the remedy proved effective, and the result
enables one to realise that a nation, like an individual, is the slave
of habit.

The history of the firm of Overend, Gurney & Co. makes sorry reading.
Between this old-established discount house and the Bank of England
there had always existed a spirit of rivalry; and when, after the
crisis of 1857, the Bank stated its intention not to again assist the
bill brokers during a time of panic, and only to make advances to them
at those periods when the Government takes large sums off the market, a
very bitter feeling sprang up between the discount houses and the Bank.

Overends, determined to show the Bank that it was not omnipotent,
allowed their account at the Bank of England to run largely into
credit, and one day suddenly demanded three millions in cash. Their
ruse failed. Indeed it was as stupid as the resolution which goaded
them into making the effort; for, of course, were the Bank to refuse
to assist the bill brokers during a panic, it would only be adding
fuel to the flames and increasing its own difficulties. Small wonder
then that so absurd a decree created intense irritation, for, upon
examination, it is evident that the Bank of England is as dependent
upon the bankers' balances in a time of panic as are the bill brokers
upon the institution which holds them. Then what folly to advertise
such a decision!

Naturally, the Bank is not pleased at the thought that it must help
its rivals over the stile, but the peculiarities of our banking system
compel it to, whether it like the task or not. Therefore, it was an
error of judgment on the part of the directors of the Bank to pose as
the champions of the banking community, and to declare that the bill
brokers must, in future, accumulate reserves of their own, when they
knew quite well that the nature of their business utterly precluded
such an attempt.

During a panic the Bank of England can only save itself by advancing
freely against certain securities and good bills. The credit so
created, however, swells the bankers' balances in its own books, and
consequently the amount standing to the credit of the bankers increases
appreciably. But, at such a moment, the bankers call in large sums from
the bill brokers, and, unless the brokers can obtain advances from the
Bank of England against good bills and gilt-edged securities, they
will be unable to satisfy the demands of Lombard Street. By declining
to advance to the bill brokers, the Bank, in reality, would be refusing
credit to Lombard Street (bankers' balances); and, as the Bank itself
could not live were Lombard Street to withdraw its balances at so
critical a time, it follows that it must lend to the bill brokers in
order to enable them to repay the bankers. It simply dare not refuse
to assist them, for, if it did, the banks might decline to support the
Bank which left them in the lurch just at the height of the storm.
The bill brokers (the outside market) come within our present credit
system, and if, when a state of panic prevails, they were left to their
fate, in every probability the system of which they form a part would
collapse with them. The brokers may not be essential to the system, but
it is always dangerous to "swop horses whilst crossing a stream."

In 1865 Overend, Gurney & Co. converted their business into a joint
stock company for the same reason that some private firms adopt the
procedure--because their profits were decreasing--though this was not
known until after the crash of 1866. During the panic of 1857 the
Bank of England made large advances to Overends; but when, early in
May, 1866, the firm again applied to the Bank for assistance, the
request was refused. It has been suggested that the Bank's decision
was prompted by malevolence, but at so crucial a moment the directors
of the Bank would have hesitated to make a rod for their own backs,
and, had they believed in the genuineness of Overends' application,
they would have gladly granted the accommodation in order to spare
themselves the panic which they knew must follow their refusal
to assist a firm with liabilities of over £19,000,000. Moreover,
subsequent events confirmed the judgment of the directors of the Bank
of England.

When the partners of Overend, Gurney & Co. discovered that their books
were full of possible bad debts, they promptly converted the firm
into a company, guaranteed the book debts, and appointed directors.
Shortly afterwards it was noticed that the Gurneys were realising their
property, and suspicion was at once aroused, for it was naturally
assumed that they had incurred heavy losses. When, therefore, the
company appealed to the Bank the next year, the directors were
sceptical, for though Overends still retained the entire confidence
of their country customers, there undoubtedly existed a feeling of
distrust in the City, and the directors of the Bank of England shared
in the opinion there prevailing.

When the rash speculations of the partners were disclosed the public
was loud in its abuse, and nothing short of a prosecution would satisfy
it; and when, early in January, 1869, the directors of Overends were
committed for trial on the gravest of charges, the crowd manifested its
delight. But the comedy followed. The trial took place at the end of
the year, by which time public opinion had completely veered round, and
when it became known that the accused were acquitted, this same crowd
cheered lustily. Small wonder that a Government, which must be well
aware of the vagaries of crowds, should hesitate to conduct a public
prosecution.

The panic of 1866, though the suspension of the Bank Act immediately
brought relief, dealt a fearful blow to credit, and the country
recovered from the shock with painful slowness. Foreigners, alarmed by
the disorganisation of the London money market, began to withdraw their
capital, and the Bank, in order to check this drain of gold outwards,
was compelled to keep its discount rate at ten per cent. for three
weary months.

By the middle of 1867 the Bank rate was at two per cent.; but even the
company promoter had not the audacity to show himself, so depressed
was the public spirit by the disasters of the previous year. The great
railway companies, too, began to find themselves in financial straits,
and their credit was so bad that they could only raise money on
debenture stocks at high rates of interest, for the public then looked
upon their ordinary shares as distinctly speculative holdings. As the
railway directors neglected to borrow with the option of redemption at
certain figures at a future date, it followed that, when their credit
greatly improved at a later period, the companies were saddled with a
huge drain in the shape of high interest on their debenture issues,
whereas, had their directors exercised ordinary prudence, they would
now be paying very much less upon their prior stocks, and consequently
the dividends on their ordinary shares would be proportionately
greater. Evidently, then, the interests of the shareholders were
sacrificed to the holders of the debenture and preferred stocks.

As the prior stocks absorb so large a share of the profits, and,
moreover, as the amount so absorbed is practically always the same,
whereas the revenue is variable, it follows that the distributions
on the ordinary shares fluctuate considerably. This fact, of course,
has not escaped speculators, who work out the ratio of ordinary share
capital to total capital; and the smaller the ratio the more inconstant
will be the dividends, and the greater the movement in prices.
Investors know that, should the trade of the country be improving
rapidly, a certain railway will earn more; and if its share capital
ratio be small, then the increase in revenue will largely swell the
ordinary dividends thereupon--so they speculate for a rise.

The Franco-German war, which broke out in 1870 did not at first
exercise any very great effect on the English money market, for though
the Bank raised its rate to six per cent. on the 4th August that year,
it was at two and a half before the end of September. Indeed, after the
panic of 1866 down to the middle of 1870, scarcely a ripple disturbed
the unusual calm of the money market, but the three crises since 1844
were largely accountable for that. They taught both Lombard Street and
the Bank of England that caution is essential to the successful working
of our banking system, and that fair reserves, however great the
loss of interest incurred thereupon, are indispensable to a banker.
The result of these bitter lessons may be read in the comparatively
peaceful history of English banking since 1866.

In 1870 specie payments were temporarily suspended by the Bank of
France, and the European demand for the precious metals had to be
met by the Bank of England. A much larger amount of foreign capital,
consequently, was deposited in London, which then became the Clearing
House of Europe, and the accumulation of so much foreign money
unquestionably made the money market more sensitive, and increased the
responsibilities of the Bank, whose store in the Issue Department was
then peculiarly exposed to the danger of a drain outwards.

The Franco-German war ended disastrously for France in 1871, and the
vanquished had to pay a huge indemnity to the victor. France paid
considerable sums to Germany by bills on England, and although Germany
employed a certain proportion of the capital so obtained in the London
money market, it withdrew large sums in gold, which were required for
purposes of currency reform. During the latter part of 1872 the Bank
rates were decidedly high, and in November, 1873, nine per cent. was
recorded for about two weeks, but by December it was down to four and
a half again. The Bank, no doubt, had its anxious moments during this
period, for the larger the drain outwards the more dependent would
be the bill brokers upon it, and the directors could not refuse to
increase their advances to the brokers, because, had they done so,
there would have been a panic at once.

We can now see distinctly how our system works. First, we get the bill
brokers or middlemen, who, from the nature of their business, cannot
afford to keep reserves, because their margin of profit is so small;
and secondly there are the bankers, who keep their reserves with the
Bank of England, which is thereby placed, so to speak, in the centre of
the money market.

The Bank, after it was stripped of its monopoly of joint stock
banking, failed for a time to understand its new environment, and it
would have closed its doors three times since 1844 but for Government
intervention, viz., in 1847, 1857, and 1866. However, when we remember
that its directors were merchants, not trained bankers, and that the
Bank had to adapt itself to entirely changed surroundings, this result
is not remarkable. So little acquainted were the directors with the
laws of banking that they actually believed the Act of 1844 would
prove a panacea for all kinds of financial troubles; but their eyes
were opened very widely indeed in 1847, and they gradually came to the
common-sense conclusion that "the higher the ratio of reserve in the
Banking Department the smaller is the danger of disaster to the Bank
and to the country."

During 1866 the Bank was fairly well prepared, and, for the first
time in its history, it met a panic in a scientific or common-sense
manner, and advanced without hesitation to all would-be borrowers whose
securities were good. The greatest danger the Bank has to face is the
suspension or stoppage of the credit machine of which it is the heart,
for if the progress of that machine be arrested, then the trade of the
country must also stop, and England will be bankrupt.

So long as the machine can be kept in motion a catastrophe is
impossible, and experience has taught the Bank that, during a period
of pronounced distrust, this can only be done by advancing liberally
against certain securities, and by a skilful use of the "Bank rate."
The whole credit machine must work smoothly, and it would be madness,
at such a moment, for the Bank to attempt to leave any part of the
machine (the bill brokers for instance) to its fate. This is now fully
recognised, and consequently a better feeling exists between the
various divisions of the money market.

The credit machine is kept in motion by the workshops; therefore,
during a panic money has to be advanced to discount good trade bills
in order to support the workshops, for if a rumour got about that the
banks were refusing the acceptances of strong firms, the pressure to
borrow would immediately increase, thereby adding a fresh danger to
the situation, and causing nervous depositors to rush in a body to the
banks for their money.

It follows, therefore, that in order to arrest a panic, and to prevent
a dangerous run upon their resources, the banks must lend freely to
strong clients. In a time of financial stress the weak go to the wall,
for finance is no exception to the rule that only the strong can live
when a storm bursts and causes a struggle for existence. There is no
room for sentiment at such a moment. The fight is bitter and to the
finish. Sentiment comes in afterwards. This state of affairs is one of
the curious products of modern civilisation, and, if you want to alter
it, you must first alter human nature, which changes strangely little
as the centuries roll on.

At first sight these sudden advances seem highly imprudent, because the
banks are parting with their resources, but unless the workshops are
assisted the banks _must_ break: whereas, by advancing liberally on
the best securities at high rates of interest, the dangerous element
is speedily weeded out, and, provided the reserves of the banks are
fairly large in proportion to their liabilities, a healthy reaction
is practically certain to assert itself long before the end of their
lending power is reached. The Bank, when it advances, of course creates
credit in its books, and so adds to the resources of Lombard Street.
The relief thus obtained is artificial, and, were it intended as a
permanent cure of a disease, it must in the end only aggravate the
malady. But it is temporary assistance during a trying time that the
workshops require, and it is just this which our modern credit system,
when skilfully administered, can give admirably. In fact it possesses
the very machinery for the purpose. This sudden demand for additional
credit (not specie) during a period of pronounced distrust is
fortunately of short duration, and the Bank is, therefore, only called
upon to make large loans for a short time, as, though the depression
following a panic may prove lasting, the acute stage which the Bank has
to face is soon over.

The dangers of our credit system are apparent to everybody; but when
critics point to the panics which have occurred since the Act was
passed, and make deductions therefrom to the effect that the Bank may
find itself in a similar plight should another such whirlwind develop,
they usually forget that, though the same danger exists, our banking
companies are now much more prudently managed, and that the directors
of the Bank of England, having the misfortunes of the past to guide
them, are thoroughly acquainted with the delicacy of the machine they
manage, and are, consequently, less liable to err.

We have seen that the joint stock banking movement began in 1826 under
conditions which were far from favourable, and the companies, like the
Bank of England itself, having to learn their business as the movement
progressed, naturally committed many blunders; but when the dangers of
banking were better understood failures became much less frequent, and
after 1866 they were few and far between. The credit of the joint stock
banks vastly improved in consequence, and confidence in their stability
soon began to take the place of distrust. But in 1878 the failure of
the City of Glasgow Bank and of the West of England Bank, together with
some half-dozen private bankers and banking companies, undoubtedly
revived old prejudices and created a feeling of unrest among depositors
and shareholders.

The City of Glasgow Bank, it will be remembered, was in trouble
during 1857, but in 1878 both its customers and shareholders had
reason to regret that it ever opened its doors again, for the gravest
irregularities were disclosed when its affairs were examined, false
balance sheets having been certified by auditors and directors during a
period of over four years; and once again the public was startled out
of its sense of security by the discovery that some bank directors and
auditors were not less peccant than the majority of the human race when
hazardous speculations landed them in financial difficulties.

The directors of the City of Glasgow Bank finding themselves out of
their depth, clutched at the proverbial straw, and, like a weak
individual who starts with the best of intentions, they were speedily
sucked into the vortex of crime. By the Act of 1845 the directors were
bound to hold gold against any excess in the amount of the bank's
circulation fixed thereby, but they overcame this difficulty by the
simple expedient of making false returns to the Government. Having once
crossed the line which separates the sheep from the goats the rest was
easy.

With an utter disregard for the interests of the shareholders, the
directors advanced huge sums to firms in which they were pecuniarily
interested, and, as these firms did badly, they were compelled either
to bolster them up with additional loans or to allow them to fail.
They chose the latter alternative, and, as might have been expected,
the bank's assets rapidly dwindled, millions of pounds in the shape of
bad debts being disguised on the right hand side of the balance sheet
as cash in hand, Government securities, and so on. The business of the
bank soon degenerated into a mere gamble, and during the latter part of
its career the institution was only kept in existence by the continuous
perpetration of frauds.

Of course the longer the game (it can be dignified by no other name)
continued the more desperate were the efforts it called forth,
and just before the end the directors hit upon the brilliant idea
of conducting a big gamble in Australia, in the vain hope that a
decided success would obliterate the mistakes of the past; but about
this time rumour was active, and when it was noticed that the bank's
acceptances were being hawked all over the City, holders of its paper
became suspicious. The bill brokers naturally do not like putting all
their eggs in one basket, but endeavour to get as many good names as
possible, so that, should a particular firm meet with misfortune, they
may be in a position to bear the loss. When, therefore, the City of
Glasgow Bank's paper was offered freely, they refused to place more of
its bills in their cases, and, inquiries concerning the bank being made
in consequence, the end soon came.

Though the revelations which followed generated a feeling of intense
nervousness among bank shareholders and depositors both in Scotland
and this country, and undoubtedly caused a slight panic, the country
was spared a crisis. The Scotch banks, in order to prevent the
run extending to themselves, encashed the notes of the delinquent
institution, and advanced liberally to those persons whose money and
securities were held by the City of Glasgow Bank. In this manner a
serious panic was averted.

The Bank of England raised its rate immediately danger was threatened,
and on the 14th October, 1878, the rate touched six per cent., but it
fell to five per cent. in November, and money was exceptionally cheap
during the next two years. The West of England Bank had also advanced
its resources in a reckless manner, and it failed badly in consequence;
but the Scotch scandals were not repeated, and the public gradually
regained confidence in the banking companies.

When it was clearly seen after the failure of the Glasgow Bank, how
easily a large bank, unless it be most cautiously and prudently
managed, can ruin its members and customers, the public hesitated to
hold shares in an unlimited banking company. For a time the prices
of bank shares fell considerably, and fiction became tediously full
of heroines and heroes who lost their fortunes by holding just one
share in the Glasgow Bank. It was the "just one share" that proved so
thrilling, and accentuated the sadness and the danger of possessing
shares in an unlimited bank. The risks of a banking business were
discussed on every side; and, after this failure, the unlimited
banking companies took steps which enabled them to affix the desirable
word "limited" to their registered names.

From the time of the failures of the City of Glasgow Bank and the West
of England Bank until 1890, when the Baring crisis suddenly opened
the eyes of the public to the dangerous gamble which was taking place
in South American securities, the money market enjoyed a period of
comparative calm. Speculation since 1885 had increased in volume, and
the prices of securities steadily rose; but early in 1890 it became
apparent that continuous speculation had inflated prices and created
a situation which could not last. The Bank rate during the autumn of
1889 was exceptionally high, and remained at six per cent. from 30th
December, 1889, to 20th February, 1890, when it gradually descended,
but this fall only proved the lull before the storm, which raged
furiously in the November following.

England has always speculated largely in both North and South America,
and the result has almost invariably been a panic. In 1890 it was the
Argentine Republic which was to prove an Eldorado for the British
investor, and Baring Brothers were so convinced that this wonderful
land must prove a veritable gold mine that they practically staked the
existence of their firm upon it, but Argentina sadly disappointed its
backers. Having staked their all and lost, there were many who thought
that Barings should have paid the penalty of their mistake, for Fate
certainly was not so kind to some of the smaller losers in the gamble
as was the Bank of England to Baring Brothers.

In June the Buenos Ayres Western Railway was unable to raise capital in
this country; and when at a later date Baring Brothers failed to place
a new Argentine loan, the worst was feared. Earlier in the year the
United States had increased its circulation of silver currency, thereby
creating a sudden demand for that metal and a proportionate rise in
those securities upon which the interest is payable in silver. A fall
soon followed; and when it was found that the Argentine Government
was in straits, Stock Exchange settlements became difficult. The
banks, which had advanced huge sums to the Stock Exchange on American
securities, increased their margins directly the markets looked
dangerous; consequently high rates of interest, together with the rapid
fall in South American securities, made "carrying over" in the House
an expensive operation. Speculators became alarmed, and sold out at
panic prices in order to cut their losses, and on 7th November pressure
upon the Bank of England became so great that the rate was raised from
five to six per cent.

Lord Revelstoke, who was a partner in the firm of Baring Brothers, was
also a director of the Bank of England, and, finding that his firm
was in difficulties, he disclosed his position to the Bank directors,
who, when they heard that Messrs. Barings' liabilities to the public
amounted to over £28,000,000, felt that even the Bank of England could
not afford to guarantee so large a sum; so, after much deliberation,
it was decided to invite the co-operation of Lombard Street in the
bolstering up of Barings, and, for the first time in its history, the
directors of our large banking institutions met the directors of the
Bank in their sacred parlour to discuss what steps should be taken in
order to avoid a disturbance of credit which, should the suspension
of Barings be announced, would probably produce a crisis even more
disastrous than that caused by the Overend and Gurney crash in 1866.

The resources of Lombard Street combined are infinitely greater than
those of the Bank, which, we have seen, largely draws its own power
therefrom, and the directors of the Bank of England, in consulting with
the directors of the joint stock banks, proved that they thoroughly
understood the constitution of the money market. Moreover, this new
step created a precedent which bound the whole market more closely
together, for each division clearly recognised how essential it is that
the great machine should work smoothly. This can only be accomplished
by the best of feeling existing between its constituent parts, and
the wise step taken by the directors of the Bank in November, 1890,
undoubtedly generated a feeling of sympathy which had formerly been
noticeably absent between the various sections of the money market,
and which augurs well for the harmonious working of the system in the
future. Such sympathy may be the outcome of enlightened selfishness,
but it is none the less valuable.

The directors of the joint stock banks, when the position of Baring
Brothers was revealed to them, instantly recognised the danger of
the position, and, as their advances to the Stock Exchange were
considerable, they were naturally anxious to prevent a catastrophe
which would create a panic in the House, and the end of which it was
impossible to foresee. Barings, who are financiers in the English
sense of the word, not bankers, had at the worst only been guilty of
imprudent speculation, and, as all inquiries were answered in the most
straightforward manner, Lombard Street was as anxious as the Old Lady
herself to assist Baring Brothers over the stile. Undoubtedly Lombard
Street would have liked to make an example of the firm that was caught
short of cash, but it was afraid to leave it to its fate, because it
knew that discrimination is not one of the characteristics of excited
depositors, and that, were Barings to close their doors, the credit of
Lombard Street would next be questioned.

The outcome of the meeting at the Bank was that the Bank of England
agreed to make advances to Baring Brothers in order to enable them
to meet their liabilities as they matured, and the large banking
companies, on their side, guaranteed the Bank against loss to the
extent of £15,000,000.

Immense sums had been invested in South America, and when it was
rumoured that the wealthy firm of Barings was tottering, Argentine
securities were practically unsaleable on the Stock Exchange, where
a state of panic prevailed. For a few days the wildest rumours were
noised abroad, and the tension, just at the height of the panic, became
so acute that even the Consol market was idle. The market then turned
in despair to the Bank, which was compelled to borrow £3,000,000 from
the Bank of France as a precautionary measure, and also to accept help
from the Russian Government.

The British Government, fully alive to the gravity of the Bank's
position, promised to suspend the Act in case of need; but when it
became known that Barings were to be supported, and that the Bank of
England was lending freely on approved securities at high rates of
interest, confidence was restored, though a few days earlier it had
looked as if a dangerous crisis were imminent. The Bank Act, however,
was not suspended, but it is difficult to say what might have happened
had not the Bank of France come to the rescue, for the gold advanced
by that institution at so awkward a time doubtless tended to greatly
alleviate the feeling of apprehension which existed in this country,
and which, at any moment, might have overcome restraint.

The Bank rate remained at six per cent. until 4th December (a period
of twenty-seven days), when it was reduced to five per cent.; for the
high rates ruling in the market attracted gold to this country, and
increased the reserve of the Bank of England beyond the apprehension
minimum, thereby enabling that institution to make the change in
question. By the middle of the following year (1891) the Bank's rate
of discount was down to two-and-a-half per cent.; but confidence was
not restored for some considerable time; and we all remember the deadly
dull years of 1894 and 1895, when it was predicted that Consols would
never again fall below 100. The financial prophets and the weather
prophets are generally wrong, but though we have acquired the habit of
tapping the glass each morning, a prudent man carries his umbrella all
the same.

The directors of the Bank of England, when they were informed of Baring
Brothers' position, acted with great tact and ability. They did not
hesitate to assist everybody who possessed good securities, and when it
was found that loanable capital was obtainable, the alarming symptoms
which were at first in evidence soon subsided. Whether or not the
Bank were sufficiently prepared at the time is, however, a matter of
opinion. The directors certainly began the year badly, for the ratio
of the reserve in the Banking Department was under twenty-eight per
cent.--a dangerously low proportion in these times, when huge sums of
foreign capital may be suddenly withdrawn from the market at the least
sign of discredit. Nor are high rates of discount always effective
in immediately attracting gold to the Bank, as the Bank of France,
should it desire to retain its bullion, can always charge a prohibitive
premium on its gold. Certainly, since 1890 the Bank of England has
maintained larger reserves, and the Baring panic unquestionably proved
that such a step was necessary.

It would seem that the panic of 1890 was the result of a Stock
Exchange gamble, which was only rendered possible by the large loans
on securities made to members of the House by the banks. The Baring
incident brought matters to a climax, and Lombard Street, which was
more involved in the speculation than many persons imagined, had to
save both that firm and the Stock Exchange in order to avoid a crop of
bad debts, which, with numerous failures, and a far greater drop in the
prices of securities, would have inevitably resulted.

Mr. Lidderdale, who was Governor of the Bank during this period, acted
with great energy, and after the danger was passed congratulations were
showered upon him from every side.

The Stock Exchange presented an address to Mr. Lidderdale, and in
making the presentation its spokesman said: "If the Bank had not acted
in the way it did, a great disaster would have befallen the mercantile
community." Yes, and that disaster would have been largely caused by
speculation on the Stock Exchange. Further, had not the directors of
the Bank met this incipient panic in a scientific manner, and used
their power as precedent dictated, members of the House would have
failed by the dozen. One is forced to the conclusion that Lombard
Street and the Stock Exchange had a lucky escape, and that the "members
of the mercantile community" were the unfortunates who, after years of
toil, had to wipe out the deficit.

Now we come to the bright side of the picture. Later on the business
of Baring Brothers was converted into a company, and in 1895 it was
definitely announced that the assets of the firm had been liquidated
without any loss whatsoever to the guarantors. Baring Brothers & Co.,
Limited, now publish a strong balance sheet, which entitles the
company to a place among our well-managed institutions, and so short is
the memory of the public when things financial are in question, that
the panic of 1890 is, if not quite forgotten, at least regarded as
ancient history. Indeed, the public hardly seems to realise that, in
November, 1890, the monetary situation was so acute that a quickening
of the public pulse would probably have resulted in one of the most
dangerous crises the country has ever been called upon to face.

After the Baring crisis the market was unperturbed for a little
while, but in 1893 many of the Australian banks found themselves in
difficulties, and as the people in this country, tempted by the high
rates offered at the London offices of the Australian banks, and by
their agents on this side, had deposited largely with them, a very
bitter feeling soon manifested itself. Australia, like South America,
was to prove an Eldorado for the small investor, but the pace was
forced, and the reaction came in 1893, when many of the banks suspended
payment. Even now some of the Australian banks in London are not any
too strong, and discrimination is certainly desirable.

On 9th October, 1899, the Boers issued their famous Ultimatum,
to which they immediately received an answer that was brief and
unmistakeable; but, unfortunately, the pen of the Government at first
proved mightier than the sword, and by 3rd November White was shut up
in Ladysmith. Then followed the failures of Methuen and Gatacre, and
on 15th December General Buller was repulsed at Colenso. Thoroughly
roused, the Government sent out Lord Roberts and Lord Kitchener. On
the night of 6th January, 1900, the Boers made a desperate attempt to
take Ladysmith, while Buller again failed to relieve the town on the
22nd, and did not enter it until after Cronje was brought to bay at
Paardeberg at the end of February.

This period of disaster cast a gloom over the whole nation, which
grew sullen and determined, and, when at last the tide began to turn,
the sudden lifting of the burden immediately metamorphosed a silent
depressed crowd into a cheering multitude, which on Mafeking day turned
London into a veritable pandemonium; but the depression caused by
unpleasant surprises was intense, and, therefore, the joy at finding
the incubus gone was the more irrepressible. Hence the disorderly
scenes upon the day in question. A reaction after the period of
suspense was inevitable, and the greater the gloom the more violent
would be the excitement that followed when the first ray of sunshine
pierced the mist. Yet how little was this understood at the time.

That financial barometer--the Bank rate--began to reflect the political
situation early in October. Our state of unpreparedness was a by-word
on the Continent, and when in September, 1899, the Boers displayed
an unyielding attitude, which was at first mistaken for bravado, our
overweening confidence in the British soldier blinded our eyes to the
imperfections of our fighting machine. The Continent, which was better
informed than the British Government, believed that the Boers were
determined. On the 3rd October, when the Free State burghers occupied
Van Reenen's Pass, the Bank advanced its rate to four-and-a-half per
cent.; on the 5th October the rate was five per cent., and on the 30th
November six per cent., where it remained until the 11th January, 1900,
when five per cent. was recorded.

But if the Government was unprepared the Bank of England was not, and
from start to finish, by a judicious use of its rate of discount, an
adequate supply of bullion was maintained in the Issue Department. Long
experience had taught its lesson, and our financial machine, which was
in a good state of preparedness, worked without a hitch. Who can doubt
that if our fighting machine had been as ably handled, it would have
done its work well from first to last?

There is also another point which is well worth attention. If our banks
neglect to keep good reserves, a panic results immediately there is
any unusual demand upon their resources, and the cost of a panic soon
convinces their directors that it is cheaper to be always prepared.
Will the expenditure of some £230,000,000 teach the Government the
same simple truth? If we must have an army, it is madness not to keep
it--as our banks are kept--ready. Mr. Kruger and his advisers did not
consider the latent potentiality of the British fighting machine. They
ascertained its state of preparedness to strike at a moment's notice,
and, seeing that it was unprepared, the Boers wisely struck the first
blow, hoping to drive the English into the sea before the machine could
be adapted to a new environment. On the other hand, they failed to
realise the resources of the Empire. Had the Boers believed that the
British could land an army of even 150,000 men in South Africa, in all
probability there would have been no war. The Government, which was
caught unprepared, had to pour out money like water, because it had
neglected to take one of the simplest business precautions--to keep the
army ready.

On 31st May, 1902, peace was declared, and now the country has to face
a domestic problem. In 1899 trade was good, and in 1900 the prices
of commodities were at their zenith; but during 1901 a reaction set
in, and at the present time trade is certainly not active. Reservists
are arriving from South Africa in large numbers; and, as the labour
market is already depressed, a number of them are sure to experience
considerable difficulty in finding employment. War is certainly not a
business that civilises, and if a man has once tasted blood, in however
just a cause, it is difficult to believe that life will seem quite so
sacred to him again. Should the times become really bad, these men who
have returned from the front, and who cannot again find a place in
civil life, will turn instinctively to the weapons upon which they have
learned to depend. Consequently, should there be a severe depression
in trade, an epidemic of crime is one of those possibilities which may
send a thrill of horror through the country.

Since September, 1899, the money market has certainly had to contend
with great difficulties, and a system which has proved itself more
than equal to the strain surely cannot be so undesirable as certain
critics would have us believe. Again, the more the public understands
the system, the less is the danger of panic; for it must be apparent to
every man who reads this book that, if he study his own interests, he
will select a strong bank, and, having taken that precaution, he will
carefully refrain from rushing for his deposit during a time of stress.




CHAPTER XVI.

The Banks and the Public.


We have seen that the history of the Bank of England may be divided
into two periods. From 1708 to 1826 the Bank enjoyed the monopoly of
joint stock banking in England. After 1826 it had to adapt itself
to a constantly changing environment. England, in fact, outgrew the
Bank, just as the financial world has outgrown London. The directors
of the Bank of England were City merchants, whose ideas usually run
in a particular groove. It is not, therefore, in the least remarkable
that they stuck to old customs and neglected new opportunities. The
directors of the London and Westminster Bank made the same mistake. So
did those of the Union Bank of London, the London Joint Stock Bank, and
one or two others, simply because their training was of the City: that
is to say, like the streets around the Bank, narrow.

To a very great extent the Bank of England is dependent upon the
bankers' balances, for, unless it held them, it would not be able to
finance the Government. If its directors had, however, thoroughly
understood the movement of 1826, the Bank would now be a much more
independent institution, and would be a power in every county in
England and Wales. In 1826 the Government expressly desired the
directors of the Bank to open country branches, and by 1830 it
possessed eleven offices in the large provincial towns. But the
innovation was not encouraged by those in authority, and to-day the
Bank of England possesses only nine country and two Metropolitan
branches. Unquestionably a golden opportunity was neglected, for, had
the directors decided to open in the large provincial towns, Bank stock
would probably be worth over five hundred at this moment.

At first the joint stock bank movement was neither popular nor
successful, but nobody questioned the credit of the Bank of England;
and if that institution had quickly met the wants of the country by
opening branches in the towns, it could have had the pick of the
provincial business, for everybody, including both commercial firms
and the leisured classes, would have been anxious to deal with a
bank which was absolutely above suspicion. And who would dream of
making a run upon the "Government" bank? The Bank would gradually have
accumulated vast deposits, which would have made it independent of
the "bankers' balances"; but the ground is now covered with banking
companies, and the Bank of England's opportunity is gone, never to
return. At present it is a great bank of discount. Had it farmed the
provinces in earnest, it would have become a great deposit bank,
deriving its power from its depositors and the Government account,
instead of from the Government and the bankers, as it now does. But
its directors were not trained bankers, and they failed to realise the
important part that branches or feeders were to play in the new system,
consequently, with the huge capital of the Bank, large dividends on its
stock are now out of the question.

Our present system is, after all, the result of chance as well as of
skill. It grew. Further it committed all the follies of youth and
inexperience. Then, again, at the beginning, it was as a house divided
against itself, and consequently upon more than one occasion it fell,
for a banking system can only be worked successfully when all the
strong members are pledged either to stand or to fall together. Indeed,
our system would be considerably strengthened if the great banks were
in closer touch with the Bank of England.

Some few years ago, when there was a somewhat bitter feeling between
Lombard Street and the Bank, it was often suggested that were each bank
to keep its own reserve of cash the rate of discount would be more
stable; but, in the event of such a change, the banks would undoubtedly
have to maintain increased reserves, and a greater proportion of their
resources would consequently be non-productive. As they would then
have less capital to lend, it also follows that, even if rates in the
open market did fluctuate less, the average rate of discount paid by
the public would be higher, because there would be less capital in the
London short loan money market to meet the demands of the bill brokers
and stockbrokers.

On the other hand, if the banks realised their investments in
proportion as they increased their reserves, and so maintained the same
amount of capital in the London short loan fund, their own profits
would decrease; and the bank proprietors are not philanthropists.
In the one case the public would suffer, and in the other the banks
themselves would lose, whilst in neither instance is the advantage
to be gained at all proportionate to the risk incurred by a sudden
disturbance of credit.

Our present system, with all its imperfections, has gradually grown
up around the Bank of England, and if Lombard Street were to decide
to keep its own reserve, the result would be confusion, and confusion
might be followed by panic--so great is the faith of the public in
the Old Lady, whose history entitles her to both consideration and
respect. The change might, or might not, result in a run upon Lombard
Street; but the Bank of England, whether or not the money market were
disorganised, would not lose the confidence of the nation, which is
convinced that the Bank cannot fail.

Lombard Street, we may rest assured, would not risk so drastic a
change. It may be urged that, were the banks to keep their own
reserves, the Bank could not finance the Government, which would then
have to borrow to a greater extent in the open market; and perhaps
such would be the case. But though the Bank of England is at present
largely dependent upon the "bankers' balances," and upon the power
derived from its position in the centre of the system, it must not be
assumed, even if the banks could agree among themselves as to the ratio
of cash each should hold, that the Bank would be compelled to bow to
their decision.

As a matter of fact, such a decision on the part of Lombard Street
would change the Bank of England from a discount bank into a deposit
bank--a metamorphosis which Lombard Street could not face with
equanimity. The Bank, whatever arrangements it may make with its own
customers, does not at present compete against Lombard Street for
deposits at interest; but were the bankers to withdraw their balances,
the Bank would be compelled to appeal to the public for deposits, and
who can doubt that it could not attract as much capital to its vaults
as it required? The Bank would only have to make its rate of interest
sufficiently attractive, and the public would rush to it with deposits.
Where would Lombard Street be then?

Unless the Bank rate be unusually high, the banks allow one-and-a-half
per cent. below it upon money left at interest in London. The country
deposit rate, which is somewhat higher, is affected to a certain
extent by competition in the provincial towns and cities. But the
Bank would not confine its efforts to London if its hand were forced.
It would offer high rates at its branches, and might even open fresh
offices. The bankers' deposit rates would then be forced upwards in
order to arrest the drain from themselves to the Bank of England. No;
Lombard Street cannot play fast and loose with the Old Lady; and,
if certain critics will reflect, they will see that the Bank has
less to fear from a change in our present system than have those who
occasionally threaten her. Her position, were the banks foolish enough
to withdraw their balances, is not quite so hopeless as it is sometimes
made to appear upon paper. Indeed, the better the understanding between
the Bank and Lombard Street, the safer is our "one reserve" system, and
consequently the less liable is the country to financial crises--for it
is only by the united action of all the great banks that the situation
can be saved in times of stress. This was clearly proved during the
Baring scare of 1890.

The "clearing" bankers from time to time fix the deposit rate for
London by the Bank rate, and though their country branches are not
bound by their decision--which is advertised in the newspapers directly
a change is made--the country deposit rate fluctuates with the Bank
rate, though, as a rule, it neither falls so low as the London rate
when capital is cheap, nor advances so far when it is dear. Further,
the rates charged for loans and advances should be regulated to a
certain extent by the Bank rate. However, that is a question which need
not be entered into here.

Should the bankers decide to keep their own reserves, it is evident
that the Bank of England's rate of discount would immediately cease
to be a representative rate, and that a powerful rival, with a great
history and a clean record, would at once begin to compete against the
bankers for both deposits and advances. Were the Bank of England, so
to speak, to decide to remain outside the system, Lombard Street could
not even fix a minimum deposit rate for London, because the Bank, if it
required capital, would bid against its rivals, and would soon obtain
all it needed. Instead of being more stable, rates in the open market
would move up and down with startling suddenness. Would-be borrowers,
puzzled by such irritating movements, would soon grow nervous, for
the prices of commodities would fluctuate too, and everybody would be
afraid to make large purchases. The closer one examines the question,
the more absurd appears the suggestion of a split between the Bank and
our great joint stock banking companies; and the only wonder is that
any person with the slightest sense of proportion can seriously advance
so dangerous a proposition, which that friend of our youth, "Euclid,"
would have at once pronounced "absurd."

Custom has placed its seal upon our banking system; and the person who
is rash enough to break that seal may discover that he has released
new forces, which, though theory plainly demonstrates that they will
act in a certain direction, are pretty sure to make their way through
an unsuspected flaw which offers less resistance. A system which has
been over two hundred years in the building cannot be changed in a
day--especially a system which, even if it be not understood, has
entered into the daily life of the people. It is because the system is
not understood that the change would be so dangerous--so irritating.
It would be asking the British public to think, to change its habits,
to suddenly adopt new ideas; and as that mysterious body has never
yet been educated up to thinking for itself, it would be found that it
would kick against a new system like the stubborn donkey it is. Here
is the real danger. The change, if the public would adapt itself to
it, might prove beneficial--but the public would not; and as even its
advantages over the present system are doubtful, where is the practical
banker who would suggest the move? His one aim is not to disturb the
money market, and for that reason alone he would hesitate to remove
the Bank of England from its position in the centre of the system; but
when we remember that the Bank, by accepting deposits, could probably
beat Lombard Street at its own game, the change in question need not be
discussed seriously.

There is one other phase in modern banking which, perhaps, calls for
notice, and that is the fierce competition for safe business taking
place between the banks themselves both in London and the provinces.
Most of our large towns and cities are overbanked. Consequently, the
public has a choice of many markets, as it were; and, quite naturally,
it tries to lend in the dearest and to borrow in the cheapest. It may
be asked: How much longer will this state of affairs exist? And the
answer is: Just so long as the banks decide that it shall; and not a
day longer!

The better the risks of banking are understood by the public the more
difficult will it be for a weak bank to attract custom; and as the
smaller banks, especially in the manufacturing centres, are unable to
obtain sufficient deposits to meet the demands for advances, it follows
that, when their loans grow out of all proportion to their resources,
they are compelled to amalgamate with a large institution possessing
numerous branches, and therefore in a position to collect huge sums of
loanable capital, and distribute it just where it is wanted.

For instance, a large bank collects very much more capital in certain
districts than it lends therein; but at branches situated in busy
manufacturing cities the demand for capital, especially when trade is
brisk, approximates much too closely to the sums collected at those
branches to be compatible with sound banking. However, the bank has
accumulated more than it requires in other towns, and is therefore
in a position to transfer the surplus to those places where demand
is strong, and, at the same time, to maintain a good ratio of liquid
assets to liabilities, whereas a local bank in a busy centre can often
only meet the requirements of its customers by advancing to a dangerous
extent.

The directors of such banking companies are beginning to realise this
danger; and fearful that one day they may be caught short of cash, the
smaller joint stock banks are gradually being absorbed by the greater
companies, whose numerous tentacles enable them to distribute their
capital evenly throughout their system, and to maintain fair cash
reserves against their liabilities.

As the small banks disappear, competitors are removed from the
market; and there is every probability that banking in this country
will by-and-by be in the hands of a few large and powerful banking
companies. The public could not resist the banks were they to unite
against it. Already the "clearing" banks have fixed the deposit rate
for London, and it is only one step farther to declare the minimum rate
at which they will advance--for what resistance can the public offer to
a combination with more than £910,000,000 in deposits alone behind it?

Were the banks to hold a conference, and to decide that competition
must be kept within bounds, the public would not have a voice in
the matter. The English banks, like those of Scotland, would, after
having come to some arrangement among themselves, meet from time to
time in order to fix the minimum rates of interest and commission, and
their customers would either have to pay those rates or else obtain
accommodation outside the confederation. Of course, all the banks would
have to close up their ranks before this arrangement would be possible,
and, at the moment of writing, it seems improbable that certain
companies, which make a business of competition, could be persuaded to
come inside. So long as the banks are divided the public will be able
to drive bargains with them, but, directly they fall into line, their
rule will begin, and the quicker the smaller companies disappear the
nearer the reign of the banks approaches.

Seeing that our banking system can only work smoothly so long as both
Lombard Street and Threadneedle Street work in harmony, it follows
that in time the link which connects the large banking companies will
become stronger, and the relations between them pleasanter, because, in
business as elsewhere, friendship is centred in the head rather than
in the heart. The banks must draw closer together, because, if they
do not, their system is unworkable; and, as they are now compelled
to adopt certain precautions in order to protect themselves against
panic on the part of their customers (who in that respect are their
enemies), it is only natural that they should take steps to put an end
to excessive competition, which weakens their position and prevents
their acting together at a moment when united action alone can restore
confidence in their ability to meet their liabilities.

We all know the stale apothegm: "Self-preservation is the first law of
nature." It is the religion of the world. We can see the law at work
among our friends, but, being polite, we refrain from comment--though
if we be wise, we reflect; for here is the great unpreached gospel
which governs the actions of men. Self-preservation clearly dictates
that the banks cannot afford to allow competition among themselves to
weaken the system upon which their safety depends; and, should the
danger become pronounced, they are certain to combine against the
public in order to at least agree to certain minimum rates below which
none will do business.

It may be said: You yourself were the first to point out that certain
customers are in a position to make terms with the bankers, and to
advise them to do so. That is true enough; and so long as the banks are
divided amongst themselves this is possible; but it by no means follows
that, because the customers can make certain bargains this year, they
will be able to make similar arrangements next, for the banks have
their remedy, and when the right time comes they will not neglect to
take it.

We have dissected that complex machine, which is called the Money
Market, and of which the Bank of England is the heart. As each unit is
dependent upon the strength of the whole, no bank should be allowed
to trade upon the credit of the rest, for obviously it cannot exist
outside the system during a time of stress unless it possess an
adequate reserve of cash. Therefore each unit ought to bear its fair
share of the burden when the sun is shining, and, if it refuse, it
should be made to take the consequences when the storm bursts.

The closer our banking system is examined the stronger becomes the
conviction that the interests of all the banks are identical, and
that, therefore, if banking is to be conducted in this country with
comparative safety, every bank should be compelled, either by the
law of the land or by public opinion, to keep a fair reserve in legal
tender against its liabilities. Further, the true interests of the
banks are the same as those of the public--for the good business man
is always a cautious man, and if he takes the trouble to study the
risks to which a banking business is exposed, he will hardly care to
place his money with a company unless it be well prepared to face those
storms to which its environment peculiarly exposes it.

Under our one reserve system the banks must either stand or fall
together during a crisis. The system, therefore, requires the support
of all; consequently, the duties or obligations of each bank should
be clearly defined, and this can only be done by an Act of Parliament
or by an understanding between the banks. The closer the banks draw
together the safer is our system of banking.




CHAPTER XVII.

Bank Stock.


When the trade of the country is prosperous, we expect to see banking
companies paying high dividends, because rising prices stimulate
borrowing on the part of the public; and, consequently, as the
resources of the banks are limited, the increased demand for loanable
capital sends up rates, with the result that distributions are
enhanced, and that the prices of bank shares advance in sympathy with
improving dividends.

We all know that there is a link which binds industries together, and
that a depression in one trade, if it prove lasting, must communicate
itself to the rest. Nor is this movement confined to any one nation.
Therefore, when we hear that a depression exists in Germany or in any
other great manufacturing country, it is a matter for regret rather
than otherwise, because the goods of that country are almost certain to
be exported here in large quantities.

If there be stagnation in Germany, then money will be cheap in that
country, and commodities will be cheap too. Manufacturers, therefore,
will be able to obtain better prices in foreign markets; consequently,
German exports will increase, and prices will soon begin to fall in
England. Again, depression in the States speedily makes itself felt in
the English markets, which become glutted with American goods, with the
result that production lessens at home, and times gradually become, as
we colloquially say, "bad."

But there is one factor with which we have not reckoned, and that is
time; for though after a period of prosperity prices generally fall
suddenly--as, for instance, during 1901--it usually takes two or three
years before production is again in full swing. In these days, when
commercial ties bind the whole world so closely together, one nation
cannot afford to rejoice at the misfortune of another; and when this
fact is more clearly seen and is better understood, possibly large
standing armies will become an unnecessary evil, for the secret of
true progress is the fact that commerce and civilisation always advance
together.

The Bank of England, which deals in money and credit like every other
bank, is exposed to the same influences as the rest of its kind;
consequently, when trade is brisk and loanable capital dear, it pays
larger dividends than during the depressed portion of a cycle. The
following table will illustrate the fact:--

 ========================================================================
                                                     £14,553,000 STOCK.
  ---------------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
                       |  1892.  |  1893.  |  1894.  |  1895.  |  1896.  |
  ---------------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
                       |         |         |         |         |         |
  Highest              | 344     | 343     | 338     | 336     | 345     |
                       |         |         |         |         |         |
  Lowest               | 325     | 325     | 322     | 322½    | 322     |
                       |         |         |         |         |         |
  Dividend % per annum |         |         |         |         |         |
     5th April         |  10     |  10     |   8     |   8     |   8½    |
                       |         |         |         |         |         |
  Dividend % per annum |         |         |         |         |         |
  5th October          |   9½    |   9     |   8½    |   8½    |  10     |
                       |         |         |         |         |         |
  ---------------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
                                    Average Distribution, 9½ per cent.
  ========================================================================

  ======================================================================
                         £14,553,000 STOCK.
  ---------------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+--------
                       |  1897.  |  1898.  |  1899.  |  1900.  | 1901.
  ---------------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+--------
                       |         |         |         |         |
  Highest              | 351½    | 367     |  36½    | 349     | 342
                       |         |         |         |         |
  Lowest               | 326     | 341     | 325     | 326     | 319¼
                       |         |         |         |         |
  Dividend % per annum |         |         |         |         |
     5th April         |  10     |  10     |  10     |  10     |  10
                       |         |         |         |         |
  Dividend % per annum |         |         |         |         |
  5th October          |  10     |  10     |  10     |  10     |  10
                       |         |         |         |         |
  ---------------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+--------
                Average Distribution, 9½ per cent.
  ======================================================================

It is at once evident that when its distributions are compared with
those of the large banking companies, the Bank does not excel as
a dividend-payer, and the reason, of course, is because it has to
distribute its earnings over so large an amount of stock or capital;
but, although it pays fluctuating dividends--which are regulated
by the average rate capital may earn during any half-year--it is
noticeable that, since 1899, despite the fact of dividends being
maintained at ten per cent. per annum, the price of Bank stock touched
lower figures than any recorded during the decade, when, according
to every financial rule, prices ought to have been well maintained.
Further, the shares of the joint stock banks did not exhibit this
tendency to any marked extent. Why, then, should Bank stock be an
exception to the rule?

The years 1894 and 1895 were distinguished by cheap money and
indifferent trade, therefore we should expect to see the Bank's
dividends decrease, and its stock fall in sympathy with diminishing
distributions. If we glance at the table we shall see that our
deductions were realised. In 1896 trade began to improve. Rising prices
lessened the purchasing power of money; consequently the industrial
machine required more capital _after_ the rise, because a given sum
would then purchase _less_. The result was an increased demand for
loanable capital, which at once became dearer; and the Bank of England,
together with the other banks in the country, earned more. Again, as
one would have expected, dividends and stock moved up together. During
1897 the same movements were witnessed; but in 1899 Bank stock began to
fall, although distributions were maintained. This deviation from rule
evidently calls for explanation. Compare, for instance, the prices of
the shares of the undermentioned banks during the period in question:--

  ===============================================================
                                   |        |         |         |
                                   |  1895. |  1899.  |  1900.  |
                                   |        |         |         |
                                   |        |         |         |
  ---------------------------------+--------+---------+---------+
                                   |        |         |         |
  London and County--_Highest_     | 95½    | 109½    | 107     |
                                   |        |         |         |
    "     "     "    _Lowest_      | 89½    | 103     | 101½    |
                                   |        |         |         |
  London and Provincial--_Highest_ | 21¾    |  22½    | 22¾     |
                                   |        |         |         |
    "     "     "        _Lowest_  | 19¼    |  21     |  21½    |
                                   |        |         |         |
  London Joint Stock-_Highest_     | 34¼    |  39     |  37⅞    |
                                   |        |         |         |
    "      "     "   _Lowest_      | 30⅞    |  33¼    |  34     |
                                   |        |         |         |
  ===============================================================
  ========================================================
                                   |         | Dividend %
                                   |  1901.  | per annum
                                   |         | each year
                                   |         | since 1898.
  ---------------------------------+---------+------------
                                   |         |
  London and County--_Highest_     | 107     |     22
                                   |         |
    "     "     "    _Lowest_      | 100¼    |
                                   |         |
  London and Provincial--_Highest_ |  23⅜    |     18
                                   |         |
    "     "     "        _Lowest_  |  20½    |
                                   |         |
  London Joint Stock-_Highest_     |  37¾    |     12
                                   |         |
    "      "     "   _Lowest_      |  34½    | 1900 & 1901
                                   |         |
  ========================================================

We can see, in the above instances, that where dividends were
maintained, prices moved between much the same figures, whilst in every
case a marked advance is shown on the quotations of 1895, whereas Bank
stock receded further in 1901, when the dividend was ten per cent.
per annum, than it did during 1895, when the distribution for the
year was only eight-and-a-quarter per cent. It is this anomaly which
we have to discuss. The trade of the country from 1896 to the end of
1900 was progressive, and though in 1901 a reaction set in, the large
requirements of the Government, and the state of uncertainty created
by the war, kept loanable capital dear. The banks, consequently, were
enabled to support their huge dividends during 1901, though their being
able to declare the same rates for the last half of the present year
seems doubtful.

But to return to the fall in Bank stock, which, at the moment of
writing, is quoted at 326. The public, so little does it understand the
position of the Bank of England, still looks upon it as a Government
institution; and, as though to give colour to this illusion, we find
its stock quoted in the same division as "British Funds &c." By The
Trustee Act, 1893, trustees, where they are not prohibited by the
trust deed, may invest in Bank of England stock; and, as a result of
this enactment, there is an increased demand for its stock, which
consequently yields less to a buyer; yet, strictly speaking, Bank stock
cannot be classed with the so-called "gilt-edged" securities, because
the interest it returns is variable.

It is true that the holder does not incur any liability, and in this
sense Bank stock is a much more desirable investment than shares in
a joint stock bank upon which the member is liable for certain stated
sums in the shape of uncalled capital; but the Government does not
guarantee the dividends of the Bank. Indeed, it is only interested
in the Bank of England in the same manner that a large customer is
interested in his banker; and, though, in every probability, so long
as the Government banks with the Old Lady, it will assist her whenever
cause may arise, it is not pledged so to do. Again, the twentieth
century may be productive of great change; and, though it seems
improbable that a Government would remove its accounts from the Bank,
such an event is by no means impossible, for the only tie between the
Government and the Bank of England is that the former is the Bank's
oldest client.

On the other hand, so long as Government does keep its balances at
the Bank of England, it cannot afford to allow the Bank to fail, even
were there the risk of it doing so. But holders of Bank stock, like
the holders of shares in any other bank, would be paid last should the
Bank be wound up, however remote a possibility that may be; and seeing
that their capital is not a prior charge upon the assets of the Bank,
and that, therefore, £100 of stock is worth £326 only so long as the
Bank of England is a going concern, it is difficult to see why Bank
stock should be considered a desirable holding for trustees. It seems
to me that, valuable though the security undoubtedly is, it does not
possess a single one of those characteristics which should distinguish
a "trustee" stock, for dividends are fluctuating, and capital is a
_last_ charge on the assets of the Bank. In fact, the stock is a kind
of guarantee to the customers--and a splendid guarantee too, for it is
the Bank's large capital which makes it the safest bank for depositors
in the land. But that the holders of a "trustee" stock should, in the
event of a company being wound up, get the _last_ look in is surely
somewhat odd. However, this is only another illustration of the
confidence the public has in the Bank of England, which, people are
convinced, will exist as long as the nation.

The Bank, because the public imagines that it is connected more closely
with the Government than in reality is the case, naturally suffers
in credit when its patron does. Consequently during 1899, when the
British reverses in South Africa increased the difficulties of the
Government and depressed Consols, Bank stock, although dividends
were maintained at ten per cent. per annum, fell in sympathy with
Government securities, despite the fact that the shares of the large
English banking companies were not appreciably affected. Of course
this depreciation, which has proved lasting, was not the result of
sound reasoning, for so long as the war continued money was sure to
be dear, and dear money plainly indicated that the Bank would support
its dividend of ten per cent. Further, the large Government borrowings
constantly compelled the outside market to borrow from the Bank, which,
had it so decided, could have charged exceptionally high rates, and
thereby have added considerably to its profit; but, with its usual
moderation, it wisely refrained from exacting excessive rates from
those who, when Lombard Street was temporarily denuded of surplus
capital, were compelled to apply to it for loans. The Bank, during the
trying period in question, certainly did not attempt to make extra
profit out of the nation's misfortune, as it assuredly might have done
had its directors been actuated by a grasping spirit. Is there another
bank in the land that would not have profited by the occasion? There
may be; but I am disposed to doubt it, and I certainly should not care
to attempt to name the institution.

Here, then, we find two influences at work at the same time, and the
result is distinctly curious. The Bank of England, from the nature of
its business, pays increased dividends when trade is good, therefore
its stock should advance in value during the prosperous portion of
a cycle; but, because of its business relation with the Government,
its stock is looked upon by the public as a kind of Government
security, and, consequently, when any political event causes Consols
to fall, Bank stock recedes in sympathy with them. There is no reason
for this movement, and if it proves anything it proves how little
Finance is understood by the investing public. Here is a stock which
pays fluctuating dividends classed with the so-called "gilt-edged"
variety of securities; therefore its movements often seem erratic,
because at one time it responds to the law that regulates the price of
gilt-edged stocks, and at another to the law which decides the price of
industrials.

It can be seen from our list that for the decade ended 1901 the Bank
of England paid an average dividend of nine-and-a-half per cent. per
annum. Based on the said average, a purchaser, if he require a return
of three per cent. for his money, will have to buy Bank stock at
316⅔; but 319¼ in 1901 is the lowest price it has touched since
1888, and it seems highly probable that our would-be purchaser at
316⅔ would wait in vain for his stock at those figures. Indeed, the
present price, 326, looks cheap for Bank stock. Bought at 325, and
based on an average dividend of nine-and-a-half per cent., the stock
would return about £2 18s. 6d. per cent. So small a return upon one's
money is not calculated to make one anxious to buy, and Consols at 93
are perhaps a greater temptation, though neither investment appeals
very strongly, so far as interest is concerned, to the imagination.

If purchased during the depressed portion of a cycle, the shares of the
large banking companies can be bought at a price which will yield an
average dividend of over four-and-a-half per cent. to the investor; but
it must be borne in mind that, as a rule, he incurs a certain liability
on such shares, whereas Bank stock is free from possible calls, and,
consequently, not exposed to the objection which is constantly urged
against the majority of bank shares as an investment.

Some of my readers, I dare say, will not agree with all my conclusions;
and, perhaps, it may be urged that the information herein contained
were better withheld from the general public. But the truth is
always worth the telling, and if our banking system will not bear
investigation then it must be a bad one. Despite obvious defects in
construction, it is apparent, however, that our great credit machine,
when skilfully managed, can successfully endure considerable strain;
and, if gold be dangerously economised, our present system at least
gives us that inestimable blessing--Cheap Money.

[Illustration]




  _Sixth Edition._        _Price 1s. net._

BANKS AND THEIR CUSTOMERS.

By HENRY WARREN,

Author of "The Story of the Bank of England." and "Your Bankers'
Position at a Glance."


"The book is amusing as well as instructive, and at the price we may
reasonably say that no one who has a banking account should omit to
read and store it in his library. More especially he who is in the
habit of keeping a large balance, as also he who is in the habit of
negotiating for an overdraft, should study what is revealed in this
book."--_Field._

"Contains a vast mass of useful information intelligently discussed. To
educate the public on a technical subject calls for more than ordinary
knowledge. It needs what Mr. Warren undoubtedly possesses, and
that is a sound practical understanding, and a thorough common-sense
way of setting forth his knowledge in simple form. This our Author
succeeds admirably in doing."--_Financial News._

"Masterly."--_Drapers' Record._

"Invaluable."--_Birmingham Daily Gazette._

"Cannot be too strongly recommended."--_Scotsman._

"His revelations are startling."--_Morning Post._

"Especially we commend the chapter 'How to check your bankers'
charges.'"--_Investors' Review._

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Author's two most flattering testimonials are_--

"Bank Manager" in _Investors' Review_ says: "The book is not worth the
paper upon which it is written."

Strangely enough, a Bank Customer writes: "Your little book has saved
me £40 a year."


EFFINGHAM WILSON, Publisher, Royal Exchange, London.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Story of the Bank of England, by Henry Warren

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE BANK OF ENGLAND ***

***** This file should be named 63449-0.txt or 63449-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/4/4/63449/

Produced by Graeme Mackreth and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

